The Project Gutenberg eBook of Frankenstein; Or, The Modern Prometheus
    
    This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
    most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
    you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
    before using this eBook.

    Title: Frankenstein; Or, The Modern Prometheus

    Author: Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley

    Release date: November 23, 2012 [eBook #41445]
                    Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

		    Language: English

		    Original publication: United Kingdom: Lackington, Hughes, Harding, Mavor, & Jones, 1818

		    Credits: Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
		            Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
			            Revised by Richard Tonsing.


				    *** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FRANKENSTEIN; OR, THE MODERN PROMETHEUS ***

				    [Transcriber’s Note: This text was produced from a photo-reprint of the
				    1818 edition.]




				                                 FRANKENSTEIN;

								                                   OR,

												                            THE MODERN PROMETHEUS.


															        IN THREE VOLUMES.
																    VOL. I.

																        London:

																	    _PRINTED FOR_
																	        LACKINGTON, HUGHES, HARDING, MAVOR, & JONES,
																		    FINSBURY SQUARE.

																		        1818.

																			       *       *       *       *       *

																			           Did I request thee, Maker, from my clay
																				       To mould me man? Did I solicit thee
																				           From darkness to promote me?——

																					                                     Paradise Lost.

																									            *       *       *       *       *

																										                              _TO_
																													                           WILLIAM GODWIN,
																																       _AUTHOR OF POLITICAL JUSTICE, CALEB WILLIAMS, &c._
																																                             THESE VOLUMES
																																			                    _Are respectfully inscribed_
																																					                               BY
																																								                              THE AUTHOR.




																																											      PREFACE.


																																											      The event on which this fiction is founded has been supposed, by Dr.
																																											      Darwin, and some of the physiological writers of Germany, as not of
																																											      impossible occurrence. I shall not be supposed as according the remotest
																																											      degree of serious faith to such an imagination; yet, in assuming it as
																																											      the basis of a work of fancy, I have not considered myself as merely
																																											      weaving a series of supernatural terrors. The event on which the
																																											      interest of the story depends is exempt from the disadvantages of a mere
																																											      tale of spectres or enchantment. It was recommended by the novelty of
																																											      the situations which it developes; and, however impossible as a physical
																																											      fact, affords a point of view to the imagination for the delineating of
																																											      human passions more comprehensive and commanding than any which the
																																											      ordinary relations of existing events can yield.

																																											      I have thus endeavoured to preserve the truth of the elementary
																																											      principles of human nature, while I have not scrupled to innovate
																																											      upon their combinations. The _Iliad_, the tragic poetry of
																																											      Greece,—Shakespeare, in the _Tempest_ and _Midsummer Night’s
																																											      Dream_,—and most especially Milton, in _Paradise Lost_, conform to this
																																											      rule; and the most humble novelist, who seeks to confer or receive
																																											      amusement from his labours, may, without presumption, apply to prose
																																											      fiction a licence, or rather a rule, from the adoption of which so many
																																											      exquisite combinations of human feeling have resulted in the highest
																																											      specimens of poetry.

																																											      The circumstance on which my story rests was suggested in casual
																																											      conversation. It was commenced, partly as a source of amusement, and
																																											      partly as an expedient for exercising any untried resources of mind.
																																											      Other motives were mingled with these, as the work proceeded. I am by no
																																											      means indifferent to the manner in which whatever moral tendencies exist
																																											      in the sentiments or characters it contains shall affect the reader; yet
																																											      my chief concern in this respect has been limited to the avoiding of the
																																											      enervating effects of the novels of the present day, and to the
																																											      exhibitions of the amiableness of domestic affection, and the excellence
																																											      of universal virtue. The opinions which naturally spring from the
																																											      character and situation of the hero are by no means to be conceived as
																																											      existing always in my own conviction; nor is any inference justly to be
																																											      drawn from the following pages as prejudicing any philosophical doctrine
																																											      of whatever kind.

																																											      It is a subject also of additional interest to the author, that this
																																											      story was begun in the majestic region where the scene is principally
																																											      laid, and in society which cannot cease to be regretted. I passed the
																																											      summer of 1816 in the environs of Geneva. The season was cold and rainy,
																																											      and in the evenings we crowded around a blazing wood fire, and
																																											      occasionally amused ourselves with some German stories of ghosts, which
																																											      happened to fall into our hands. These tales excited in us a playful
																																											      desire of imitation. Two other friends (a tale from the pen of one of
																																											      whom would be far more acceptable to the public than any thing I can
																																											      ever hope to produce) and myself agreed to write each a story, founded
																																											      on some supernatural occurrence.

																																											      The weather, however, suddenly became serene; and my two friends left me
																																											      on a journey among the Alps, and lost, in the magnificent scenes which
																																											      they present, all memory of their ghostly visions. The following tale is
																																											      the only one which has been completed.




																																											      FRANKENSTEIN;

																																											      OR, THE

																																											      _MODERN PROMETHEUS._




																																											      LETTER I.


																																											      _To Mrs._ SAVILLE, _England_.

																																											      St. Petersburgh, Dec. 11th, 17—.

																																											      You will rejoice to hear that no disaster has accompanied the
																																											      commencement of an enterprise which you have regarded with such evil
																																											      forebodings. I arrived here yesterday; and my first task is to assure my
																																											      dear sister of my welfare, and increasing confidence in the success of
																																											      my undertaking.

																																											      I am already far north of London; and as I walk in the streets of
																																											      Petersburgh, I feel a cold northern breeze play upon my cheeks, which
																																											      braces my nerves, and fills me with delight. Do you understand this
																																											      feeling? This breeze, which has travelled from the regions towards which
																																											      I am advancing, gives me a foretaste of those icy climes. Inspirited by
																																											      this wind of promise, my day dreams become more fervent and vivid. I try
																																											      in vain to be persuaded that the pole is the seat of frost and
																																											      desolation; it ever presents itself to my imagination as the region of
																																											      beauty and delight. There, Margaret, the sun is for ever visible; its
																																											      broad disk just skirting the horizon, and diffusing a perpetual
																																											      splendour. There—for with your leave, my sister, I will put some trust
																																											      in preceding navigators—there snow and frost are banished; and, sailing
																																											      over a calm sea, we may be wafted to a land surpassing in wonders and in
																																											      beauty every region hitherto discovered on the habitable globe. Its
																																											      productions and features may be without example, as the phænomena of the
																																											      heavenly bodies undoubtedly are in those undiscovered solitudes. What
																																											      may not be expected in a country of eternal light? I may there discover
																																											      the wondrous power which attracts the needle; and may regulate a
																																											      thousand celestial observations, that require only this voyage to render
																																											      their seeming eccentricities consistent for ever. I shall satiate my
																																											      ardent curiosity with the sight of a part of the world never before
																																											      visited, and may tread a land never before imprinted by the foot of man.
																																											      These are my enticements, and they are sufficient to conquer all fear of
																																											      danger or death, and to induce me to commence this laborious voyage with
																																											      the joy a child feels when he embarks in a little boat, with his holiday
																																											      mates, on an expedition of discovery up his native river. But, supposing
																																											      all these conjectures to be false, you cannot contest the inestimable
																																											      benefit which I shall confer on all mankind to the last generation, by
																																											      discovering a passage near the pole to those countries, to reach which
																																											      at present so many months are requisite; or by ascertaining the secret
																																											      of the magnet, which, if at all possible, can only be effected by an
																																											      undertaking such as mine.

																																											      These reflections have dispelled the agitation with which I began my
																																											      letter, and I feel my heart glow with an enthusiasm which elevates me to
																																											      heaven; for nothing contributes so much to tranquillize the mind as a
																																											      steady purpose,—a point on which the soul may fix its intellectual eye.
																																											      This expedition has been the favourite dream of my early years. I have
																																											      read with ardour the accounts of the various voyages which have been
																																											      made in the prospect of arriving at the North Pacific Ocean through the
																																											      seas which surround the pole. You may remember, that a history of all
																																											      the voyages made for purposes of discovery composed the whole of our
																																											      good uncle Thomas’s library. My education was neglected, yet I was
																																											      passionately fond of reading. These volumes were my study day and night,
																																											      and my familiarity with them increased that regret which I had felt, as
																																											      a child, on learning that my father’s dying injunction had forbidden my
																																											      uncle to allow me to embark in a sea-faring life.

																																											      These visions faded when I perused, for the first time, those poets
																																											      whose effusions entranced my soul, and lifted it to heaven. I also
																																											      became a poet, and for one year lived in a Paradise of my own creation;
																																											      I imagined that I also might obtain a niche in the temple where the
																																											      names of Homer and Shakespeare are consecrated. You are well acquainted
																																											      with my failure, and how heavily I bore the disappointment. But just at
																																											      that time I inherited the fortune of my cousin, and my thoughts were
																																											      turned into the channel of their earlier bent.

																																											      Six years have passed since I resolved on my present undertaking. I can,
																																											      even now, remember the hour from which I dedicated myself to this great
																																											      enterprise. I commenced by inuring my body to hardship. I accompanied
																																											      the whale-fishers on several expeditions to the North Sea; I voluntarily
																																											      endured cold, famine, thirst, and want of sleep; I often worked harder
																																											      than the common sailors during the day, and devoted my nights to the
																																											      study of mathematics, the theory of medicine, and those branches of
																																											      physical science from which a naval adventurer might derive the greatest
																																											      practical advantage. Twice I actually hired myself as an under-mate in
																																											      a Greenland whaler, and acquitted myself to admiration. I must own I
																																											      felt a little proud, when my captain offered me the second dignity in
																																											      the vessel, and entreated me to remain with the greatest earnestness; so
																																											      valuable did he consider my services.

																																											      And now, dear Margaret, do I not deserve to accomplish some great
																																											      purpose. My life might have been passed in ease and luxury; but I
																																											      preferred glory to every enticement that wealth placed in my path. Oh,
																																											      that some encouraging voice would answer in the affirmative! My courage
																																											      and my resolution is firm; but my hopes fluctuate, and my spirits are
																																											      often depressed. I am about to proceed on a long and difficult voyage;
																																											      the emergencies of which will demand all my fortitude: I am required not
																																											      only to raise the spirits of others, but sometimes to sustain my own,
																																											      when their’s are failing.

																																											      This is the most favourable period for travelling in Russia. They fly
																																											      quickly over the snow in their sledges; the motion is pleasant, and, in
																																											      my opinion, far more agreeable than that of an English stage-coach. The
																																											      cold is not excessive, if you are wrapt in furs, a dress which I have
																																											      already adopted; for there is a great difference between walking the
																																											      deck and remaining seated motionless for hours, when no exercise
																																											      prevents the blood from actually freezing in your veins. I have no
																																											      ambition to lose my life on the post-road between St. Petersburgh and
																																											      Archangel.

																																											      I shall depart for the latter town in a fortnight or three weeks; and my
																																											      intention is to hire a ship there, which can easily be done by paying
																																											      the insurance for the owner, and to engage as many sailors as I think
																																											      necessary among those who are accustomed to the whale-fishing. I do not
																																											      intend to sail until the month of June: and when shall I return? Ah,
																																											      dear sister, how can I answer this question? If I succeed, many, many
																																											      months, perhaps years, will pass before you and I may meet. If I fail,
																																											      you will see me again soon, or never.

																																											      Farewell, my dear, excellent, Margaret. Heaven shower down blessings on
																																											      you, and save me, that I may again and again testify my gratitude for
																																											      all your love and kindness.

																																											      Your affectionate brother,

																																											      R. WALTON.




																																											      LETTER II.


																																											      _To Mrs._ SAVILLE, _England_.

																																											      Archangel, 28th March, 17—.

																																											      How slowly the time passes here, encompassed as I am by frost and snow;
																																											      yet a second step is taken towards my enterprise. I have hired a vessel,
																																											      and am occupied in collecting my sailors; those whom I have already
																																											      engaged appear to be men on whom I can depend, and are certainly
																																											      possessed of dauntless courage.

																																											      But I have one want which I have never yet been able to satisfy; and the
																																											      absence of the object of which I now feel as a most severe evil. I have
																																											      no friend, Margaret: when I am glowing with the enthusiasm of success,
																																											      there will be none to participate my joy; if I am assailed by
																																											      disappointment, no one will endeavour to sustain me in dejection. I
																																											      shall commit my thoughts to paper, it is true; but that is a poor medium
																																											      for the communication of feeling. I desire the company of a man who
																																											      could sympathize with me; whose eyes would reply to mine. You may deem
																																											      me romantic, my dear sister, but I bitterly feel the want of a friend. I
																																											      have no one near me, gentle yet courageous, possessed of a cultivated as
																																											      well as of a capacious mind, whose tastes are like my own, to approve
																																											      or amend my plans. How would such a friend repair the faults of your
																																											      poor brother! I am too ardent in execution, and too impatient of
																																											      difficulties. But it is a still greater evil to me that I am
																																											      self-educated: for the first fourteen years of my life I ran wild on a
																																											      common, and read nothing but our uncle Thomas’s books of voyages. At
																																											      that age I became acquainted with the celebrated poets of our own
																																											      country; but it was only when it had ceased to be in my power to derive
																																											      its most important benefits from such a conviction, that I perceived the
																																											      necessity of becoming acquainted with more languages than that of my
																																											      native country. Now I am twenty-eight, and am in reality more illiterate
																																											      than many school-boys of fifteen. It is true that I have thought more,
																																											      and that my day dreams are more extended and magnificent; but they want
																																											      (as the painters call it) _keeping_; and I greatly need a friend who
																																											      would have sense enough not to despise me as romantic, and affection
																																											      enough for me to endeavour to regulate my mind.

																																											      Well, these are useless complaints; I shall certainly find no friend on
																																											      the wide ocean, nor even here in Archangel, among merchants and seamen.
																																											      Yet some feelings, unallied to the dross of human nature, beat even in
																																											      these rugged bosoms. My lieutenant, for instance, is a man of wonderful
																																											      courage and enterprise; he is madly desirous of glory. He is an
																																											      Englishman, and in the midst of national and professional prejudices,
																																											      unsoftened by cultivation, retains some of the noblest endowments of
																																											      humanity. I first became acquainted with him on board a whale vessel:
																																											      finding that he was unemployed in this city, I easily engaged him to
																																											      assist in my enterprise.

																																											      The master is a person of an excellent disposition, and is remarkable in
																																											      the ship for his gentleness, and the mildness of his discipline. He is,
																																											      indeed, of so amiable a nature, that he will not hunt (a favourite, and
																																											      almost the only amusement here), because he cannot endure to spill
																																											      blood. He is, moreover, heroically generous. Some years ago he loved a
																																											      young Russian lady, of moderate fortune; and having amassed a
																																											      considerable sum in prize-money, the father of the girl consented to the
																																											      match. He saw his mistress once before the destined ceremony; but she
																																											      was bathed in tears, and, throwing herself at his feet, entreated him to
																																											      spare her, confessing at the same time that she loved another, but that
																																											      he was poor, and that her father would never consent to the union. My
																																											      generous friend reassured the suppliant, and on being informed of the
																																											      name of her lover instantly abandoned his pursuit. He had already bought
																																											      a farm with his money, on which he had designed to pass the remainder of
																																											      his life; but he bestowed the whole on his rival, together with the
																																											      remains of his prize-money to purchase stock, and then himself solicited
																																											      the young woman’s father to consent to her marriage with her lover. But
																																											      the old man decidedly refused, thinking himself bound in honour to my
																																											      friend; who, when he found the father inexorable, quitted his country,
																																											      nor returned until he heard that his former mistress was married
																																											      according to her inclinations. “What a noble fellow!” you will exclaim.
																																											      He is so; but then he has passed all his life on board a vessel, and has
																																											      scarcely an idea beyond the rope and the shroud.

																																											      But do not suppose that, because I complain a little, or because I can
																																											      conceive a consolation for my toils which I may never know, that I am
																																											      wavering in my resolutions. Those are as fixed as fate; and my voyage is
																																											      only now delayed until the weather shall permit my embarkation. The
																																											      winter has been dreadfully severe; but the spring promises well, and it
																																											      is considered as a remarkably early season; so that, perhaps, I may sail
																																											      sooner than I expected. I shall do nothing rashly; you know me
																																											      sufficiently to confide in my prudence and considerateness whenever the
																																											      safety of others is committed to my care.

																																											      I cannot describe to you my sensations on the near prospect of my
																																											      undertaking. It is impossible to communicate to you a conception of the
																																											      trembling sensation, half pleasurable and half fearful, with which I am
																																											      preparing to depart. I am going to unexplored regions, to “the land of
																																											      mist and snow;” but I shall kill no albatross, therefore do not be
																																											      alarmed for my safety.

																																											      Shall I meet you again, after having traversed immense seas, and
																																											      returned by the most southern cape of Africa or America? I dare not
																																											      expect such success, yet I cannot bear to look on the reverse of the
																																											      picture. Continue to write to me by every opportunity: I may receive
																																											      your letters (though the chance is very doubtful) on some occasions when
																																											      I need them most to support my spirits. I love you very tenderly.
																																											      Remember me with affection, should you never hear from me again.

																																											      Your affectionate brother,

																																											      ROBERT WALTON.




																																											      LETTER III.


																																											      _To Mrs._ SAVILLE, _England_.

																																											      July 7th, 17—.

																																											      MY DEAR SISTER,

																																											      I write a few lines in haste, to say that I am safe, and well advanced
																																											      on my voyage. This letter will reach England by a merchant-man now on
																																											      its homeward voyage from Archangel; more fortunate than I, who may not
																																											      see my native land, perhaps, for many years. I am, however, in good
																																											      spirits: my men are bold, and apparently firm of purpose; nor do the
																																											      floating sheets of ice that continually pass us, indicating the dangers
																																											      of the region towards which we are advancing, appear to dismay them. We
																																											      have already reached a very high latitude; but it is the height of
																																											      summer, and although not so warm as in England, the southern gales,
																																											      which blow us speedily towards those shores which I so ardently desire
																																											      to attain, breathe a degree of renovating warmth which I had not
																																											      expected.

																																											      No incidents have hitherto befallen us, that would make a figure in a
																																											      letter. One or two stiff gales, and the breaking of a mast, are
																																											      accidents which experienced navigators scarcely remember to record; and
																																											      I shall be well content, if nothing worse happen to us during our
																																											      voyage.

																																											      Adieu, my dear Margaret. Be assured, that for my own sake, as well as
																																											      your’s, I will not rashly encounter danger. I will be cool, persevering,
																																											      and prudent.

																																											      Remember me to all my English friends.

																																											      Most affectionately yours,

																																											      R. W.




																																											      LETTER IV.


																																											      _To Mrs._ SAVILLE, _England_.

																																											      August 5th, 17—.

																																											      So strange an accident has happened to us, that I cannot forbear
																																											      recording it, although it is very probable that you will see me before
																																											      these papers can come into your possession.

																																											      Last Monday (July 31st), we were nearly surrounded by ice, which closed
																																											      in the ship on all sides, scarcely leaving her the sea room in which she
																																											      floated. Our situation was somewhat dangerous, especially as we were
																																											      compassed round by a very thick fog. We accordingly lay to, hoping that
																																											      some change would take place in the atmosphere and weather.

																																											      About two o’clock the mist cleared away, and we beheld, stretched out in
																																											      every direction, vast and irregular plains of ice, which seemed to have
																																											      no end. Some of my comrades groaned, and my own mind began to grow
																																											      watchful with anxious thoughts, when a strange sight suddenly attracted
																																											      our attention, and diverted our solicitude from our own situation. We
																																											      perceived a low carriage, fixed on a sledge and drawn by dogs, pass on
																																											      towards the north, at the distance of half a mile: a being which had the
																																											      shape of a man, but apparently of gigantic stature, sat in the sledge,
																																											      and guided the dogs. We watched the rapid progress of the traveller
																																											      with our telescopes, until he was lost among the distant inequalities of
																																											      the ice.

																																											      This appearance excited our unqualified wonder. We were, as we believed,
																																											      many hundred miles from any land; but this apparition seemed to denote
																																											      that it was not, in reality, so distant as we had supposed. Shut in,
																																											      however, by ice, it was impossible to follow his track, which we had
																																											      observed with the greatest attention.

																																											      About two hours after this occurrence, we heard the ground sea; and
																																											      before night the ice broke, and freed our ship. We, however, lay to
																																											      until the morning, fearing to encounter in the dark those large loose
																																											      masses which float about after the breaking up of the ice. I profited of
																																											      this time to rest for a few hours.

																																											      In the morning, however, as soon as it was light, I went upon deck, and
																																											      found all the sailors busy on one side of the vessel, apparently talking
																																											      to some one in the sea. It was, in fact, a sledge, like that we had seen
																																											      before, which had drifted towards us in the night, on a large fragment
																																											      of ice. Only one dog remained alive; but there was a human being within
																																											      it, whom the sailors were persuading to enter the vessel. He was not, as
																																											      the other traveller seemed to be, a savage inhabitant of some
																																											      undiscovered island, but an European. When I appeared on deck, the
																																											      master said, “Here is our captain, and he will not allow you to perish
																																											      on the open sea.”

																																											      On perceiving me, the stranger addressed me in English, although with a
																																											      foreign accent. “Before I come on board your vessel,” said he, “will you
																																											      have the kindness to inform me whither you are bound?”

																																											      You may conceive my astonishment on hearing such a question addressed to
																																											      me from a man on the brink of destruction, and to whom I should have
																																											      supposed that my vessel would have been a resource which he would not
																																											      have exchanged for the most precious wealth the earth can afford. I
																																											      replied, however, that we were on a voyage of discovery towards the
																																											      northern pole.

																																											      Upon hearing this he appeared satisfied, and consented to come on board.
																																											      Good God! Margaret, if youozen, and his body dreadfully emaciated by fatigue and suffering. I
																																											      never saw a man in so wretched a condition. We attempted to carry him
																																											      into the cabin; but as soon as he had quitted the fness,
																																											      and even madness; but there are moments when, if any one performs an act
																																											      of kindness towards him, or does him any the most trifling service, his
																																											      whole countenance is lighted up, as itid the man whom you pursued travel in the same fashion?”

																																											      “Yes.”

																																											      “Then I fancy we have seen him; for, the day before we picked you up, we
																																											      saw some dogs drawing a sledge, wimight have arrived at a place of safety
																																											      before that time; but of this I could not judge.

																																											      From this time the stranger seemed very eager to be upon deck, to watch
																																											      for the sledge which had before appeared; but I have persuaded him to
																																											      remain in the cabin,one except myself enters his cabin.
																																											      Yet his manners are so conciliating and gentle, that the sailors are all
																																											      interested in him, although they have had very little communication with
																																											      him. Fothout feeling the most poignant grief?
																																											      He is so gentle, yet so wise; his mind is so cultivated; and when he
																																											      speaks, although his words are culled with the choicest art, yet they
																																											      flow with rd several alterations in my plan, which I shall find
																																											      exceedingly useful. There is no pedantry in his manner; but all he does
																																											      appears to spring solely from the interest he instinctively takehe stranger, “in believing that friendship
																																											      is not only a desirable, but a possible acquisition. I once had a
																																											      friend, the most noble of human creatures, and am entitled, therefore,
																																											      to jur misery, and be overwhelmed by disappointments; yet when he has
																																											      retired into himself, he will be like a celestial spirit, that has a
																																											      halo around him, within whose circle no grief or folly ventures.

																																											      Will you laugh at the enthusiasm I express concerninlation of my misfortunes will be useful to you, yet,
																																											      if you are inclined, listen to my tale. I believe that the strange
																																											      incidents connected with it will afford a view of nature, which may
																																											      es; my
																																											      fate is nearly fulfilled. I wait but for one event, and then I shall
																																											      repose in peace. I understand your feeling,” continued he, perceiving
																																											      that I wished to interrupt him; “butst and sympathy shall I
																																											      read it in some future day!




																																											      FRANKENSTEIN;

																																											      OR,

																																											      THE MODERN PROMETHEUS.




																																											      CHAPTER I.


																																											      I am by birth a Genevese; and my family is one of the most distinguished
																																											      , where he lived unknown and in wretchedness. My
																																											      father loved Beaufort with the truest friendship, and was deeply grieved
																																											      by his retreat in these unfortunate circumstances. He grieved also a very small sum of money from the
																																											      wreck of his fortunes; but it was sufficient to provide him with
																																											      sustenance for some months, and in the mean time he hoped to procure
																																											      some respectable emps coffin, weeping bitterly, when my father entered the
																																											      chamber. He came like a protecting spirit to the poor girl, who
																																											      committed herself to his care, and after the interment of his friend he
																																											      conducted her to Geneva, and placed her under the protection d who had married
																																											      early in life an Italian gentleman. Soon after her marriage, she had
																																											      accompanied her husband into her native country, and for some years my
																																											      father had very little communicdid not hesitate, and immediately went to Italy, that he
																																											      might accompany the little Elizabeth to her future home. I have often
																																											      heard my mother say, that she was at that time the most beautiid to constraint and caprice. Her imagination was luxuriant,
																																											      yet her capability of application was great. Her person was the image of
																																											      her mind; her hazel eyes, although as lively as a birdâcters, there was an harmony in that very dissimilitude. I was
																																											      more calm and philosophical than my companion; yet my temper was not so
																																											      yielding. My application was of longer endurance; but singular talent and fancy. I remember, when he
																																											      was nine years amazement of all his companions. His favourite study consisted ks
																																											      of chivalry and romance; and when very young, I can remembers in those languages; and so far from
																																											      study being made odious to us through punishment, we loved application,
																																											      and our amusements would have been the labours of other children.
																																											      Perhaps we did not read so many books, or learn languages so quickly, as
																																											      thot visions of
																																											      extensive usefulness into gloomy and narrow reflections upon self. But,
																																											      in drawing the picture of my early days, I must not omit to record those
																																											      events which led, by insensibleis
																																											      house I chanced to find a volume of the works of Cornelius Agrippa. I
																																											      opened it with apathy; the theory which he attempts to demonstrate, and
																																											      the wonderful facts which he relates, soon cer were
																																											      chimerical, while those of the former were real and practical; under
																																											      such circumstances, I should certainly have thrown Agrippa aside, and,
																																											      with my imagination warmed as it was, shoto procure the whole works of
																																											      this author, and afterwards of Paracelsus and Albertus Magnus. I read
																																											      and studied the wild fancies of these writers with delight; they
																																											      appeared to me treasurestention: wealth was an inferior object; but what glory would attend
																																											      the discovery, if I could banish disease from the human frame, and
																																											      render man invulnerable to any but a violent death!

																																											      N did not
																																											      escape my examinations. Distillation, and the wonderfuby some
																																											      experiments on an air-pump, which I saw employed by a gentleman whom we
																																											      were in the habit of visiting.

																																											      The ignorance of the early philosophers on these and several other
																																											      points serand so soon as the dazzling light vanished, the oak had
																																											      disappeared, and nothing remained but a blasted stump. When we visited
																																											      it the next morning, we found the tree shattered in a singularAlbertus
																																											      Magnus, and Paracelsus, who had so long reigned the lords of my
																																											      imagination. But by some fatality I did not feel inclined to commence
																																											      the study of any modern system; and this disinrs, in my estimation, of nearly equal interest and utility.

																																											      My occupations at this age were principally the mathematics, and most of
																																											      the branches of study appertaining to that science. I w attained the age of seventeen, my parents resolved that I
																																											      should become a student at the university of Ingolstadt. I had hitherto
																																											      attended the schools of Geneva; but my father thought it nShe
																																											      had, at first, yielded to our entreaties; but when she heard that her
																																											      favourite was recovering, she could no longer debar herself from her
																																											      society, and entered her chamber long before the danger of infection was
																																											      past. The consequences of this impruur
																																											      union. This expectation will now be the consolation of your father.
																																											      Elizabeth, my love, you must supply my place to your younger cousins.
																																											      Alas! I regret that I am taken from you; and, haave departed for
																																											      ever—that the brightness of a beloved eye can have been extinguished,
																																											      and the sound of a voice so familiar, and dear to the ear, can be
																																											      hushed, never more to be heard.  fortunate, whilst one remains whom the spoiler has not seized.

																																											      My journey to Ingolstadt, which had been deferred by these events, was
																																											      now again determined upon. I obtained from my father leave of all my
																																											      friends, excepting Clerval, who spent the last evening with us. He
																																											      bitterly lamented that he was unable to accompany me: but his father
																																											      could not be persuaded to part with hparture, and partly because she reflected that the same journey was
																																											      to have taken place three months before, when a mother’s blessing would
																																											      have accompanied me.

																																											      I threw myself into theers. Such were my
																																											      reflections as I commenced my journey; but as I proceeded, my spirits
																																											      and hopes rose. I ardently desired the acquisition of knowledge. I had
																																											      often, when at home, thought it hard to remain during my youth cooped up
																																											      in one place, and hape, professor of natural philosophy. He received me with politeness,
																																											      and asked me several questions concerning my progress in the different
																																											      branches of science appertaining to natural philond years old, and as musty as they are
																																											      ancient? I little expected in this enlightened and scientific age to
																																											      find a disciple of Albertus Magnus and Paracelsus. My dear Sir, you must
																																											      begin yorocured at his
																																											      recommendation. M. Krempe was a little squat man, with a gruff voice and
																																											      repulsive countenance; the teacher, therefore, did not prepossess me in
																																											      favour of his doctrine. Besidthought of the
																																											      information which M. Krempe had given me concerning the lectures. And
																																											      although I could not consent to go and hear that little conceited fellow
																																											      deliver sentences out of a pulpd the various improvements made by different
																																											      men of learning, pronouncing with fervour the names of the most
																																											      distinguished discoverers. He then took a cursory view of the present
																																											      state of thave acquired new and almost
																																											      unlimited powers; they can commandhunders of heaven, mimic the
																																											      earthquake, and even mock the invisible world with its own shadows.”

																																											      I departed highly pleased with the professor and his lecture, and paid
																																											      him a visit theinging to light. The labours
																																											      of men of genius, however erroneously directed, scarcely ever fail in
																																											      ultimately turning to the solid advantage of mankind.” I listened to his
																																											      statement, whhematics.”

																																											      He then took me into his laboratory, and explained to me the uses of
																																											      his various machines; instructing me as to what I ought to procure, and
																																											      promising me the use of his own,tion, combined, it is true, with a repulsive physiognomy
																																											      and manners, but not on that account the less valuable. In M. Waldman I
																																											      found a true friend. His gentleness was never tinged by dogmght of morning whilst
																																											      I was yet engaged in my laboratory.

																																											      As I applied so closely, it may be easily conceived that I improved
																																											      rapidly. My ardour was indeed the astonishment of the studentsnd of moderate
																																											      capacity, which closely pursues one study, must infallibly arrive at
																																											      great proficiency in that study; and I, who continually sought the
																																											      attainment of one object of pursuit, and was solely wrapt up in this,
																																											      improved so rapidly, that, at tof the human frame, and, indeed, any animal endued with life.
																																											      Whence, I often asked myself, did the principle of life proceed? It was
																																											      a bold question, and one which has ever been considered the natural
																																											      decay and corruption of the human body. In my education my father had
																																											      taken the greatest precautions that my mind should be impressed with no
																																											      supernatural horrors. I do not eveucceed to the blooming cheek of life; I
																																											      saw how the worm inherited the wonders of the eye and brain. I paused,
																																											      examining and analysing all the minutiæ of causation, as exemplified in
																																											      the c distinct and probable. After days and nights of
																																											      incredible labour and fatigue, I succeeded in discovering the cause of
																																											      generation and life; nay, more, I became myself capable of bestowing

																																											      and overwhelming, that all the steps by which I had been progressively
																																											      led to it were obliterated, and I beheld only the result. What had been
																																											      the study and desire of the wisest men since d, that you expect to be informed of the secret with
																																											      which I am acquainted; that cannot be: listen patiently until the end of
																																											      my story, and you will easily perceive why I am reserved upon that
																																											      subject. I will not lead you on, unguarded and ardent as I us an
																																											      undertaking; but I doubted not that I should ultimately succeed. I
																																											      prepared myself for a multitude of reverses; my operations might be
																																											      incessantly baffled, and at last my work be impeng formed this
																																											      determination, and having spent some months in successfully collecting
																																											      and arranging my materials, I began.

																																											      No one can conceive the variety of feelings which bore me onwards supported my spirits, while I pursued my undertaking with
																																											      unremitting ardour. My cheek had grown pale with study, and my person
																																											      had become emaciated with confinement. Sometimes, on the verturned to my old habits. I
																																											      collected bones from charnel houses; and disturbed, with profane
																																											      fingers, the tremendous secrets of the human frame. In a solitary
																																											      chamber, or rather cell, at theo the charms of nature. And the same
																																											      feelings which made me neglect the scenes around me caused me also to
																																											      forget those friends who were so many miles absent, and whom I had not
																																											      seen for soit were,
																																											      to procrastinate all that related to my feelings of affection until the
																																											      great object, which swallowed up every habit of my nature, should be
																																											      completed.

																																											      I then thought that my father would be unjust if he ascribed my neglect
																																											      to vice, or faultiu apply yourself has a
																																											      tendency to weaken your affections, and to destroy your taste for those
																																											      simple pleasures in which no alloy can possibly mix, then that study is
																																											      certainly unlawful, thse; and now every day shewed me more plainly how well I had
																																											      succeeded. But my enthusiasm was checked by my anxiety, and I appeared
																																											      rather like one doomed by slavery to toil in the mines, oround me, that I might infuse a spark of being
																																											      into the lifeless thing that lay at my feet. It was already one in the
																																											      morning; the rain pattered dismally against the panes, and my candle wasble as the feelings of
																																											      human nature. I had worked hard for nearly two years, for the sole
																																											      purpose of infusing life into an inanimate body. For this I had deprived
																																											      myself of rest and health.ed and surprised, I embraced her; but as I
																																											      imprinted the first kiss on her lips, they became livid with the hue of
																																											      death; her features appeared to change, and I thought that I held the
																																											      corp, seemingly to detain me, but I escaped,
																																											      and rushed down stairs. I took refuge in the court-yard belonging to the
																																											      house which I inhabited; where I remained during the rest of the night,
																																											      walking up and down in the greatest agitation, listening attentiveank to the ground through languor and extreme weakness. Mingled with
																																											      this horror, I felt the bitterness of disappointment: dreams that had
																																											      been my food and pleasant rest for so long a spacecontinued walking in this manner for some time, endeavouring, by
																																											      bodily exercise, to ease the load that weighed upon my mind. I
																																											      traversed the streets, without any clear conception of where g; and, on the door being opened, I perceived Henry
																																											      Clerval, who, on seeing me, instantly sprung out. “My dear
																																											      Frankenstein,” exclaimed he, “how glad I am to see you! how fortungolstadt. “You may easily
																																											      believe,” said he, “how great was the difficulty to persuade my father
																																											      that it was not absolutely necessary for a merchant not to understand
																																											      any thing  you a little upon their account
																																											      myself.—But, my dear Frankenstein,” continued he, stopping short, and
																																											      gazing full in my face, “I did not before remark how very ill you
																																											      appear; so thin and pale; you look as if you had been watching for
																																											      sevewalked with a quick
																																											      pace, and we soon arrived at my college. I then reflected, and the
																																											      thought made me shiver, that the creature whom I had left in my
																																											      apartment might still be there, alive,my had indeed fled, I
																																											      clapped my hands for joy, and ran down tonto my room, and the servant presently brought breakfast;
																																											      but I was unable to contain myself. It was not joy only that possess, he spared them this grief by concealing the extent of my
																																											      disorder. He knew that I could not have a more kind and attentive nurse
																																											      than himself; and, firm in the hope he felt of my recoveryend, I recovered. I remember the first time I became
																																											      capable of observing outward objects with any kind of pleasure, I
																																											      perceived that the fallen leaves had disappeared, and that the young
																																											      by me entirely, if you do not discompose yourself, but get
																																											      well as fast as you can; and since you appear in such good spirits, I
																																											      may speak to you on one subject, may I not?”

																																											      I trembled.perhaps be glad to
																																											      see a letter that has been lying here some days for you: it is from your
																																											      cousin, I believe.”




																																											      CHAPTER V.


																																											      Clerval then put the following letter into my hands.

																																											             *       *       *       *       *

																																												     “_To_ V. FRANKENSTEmuch so nearly
																																												     as after the death of your dear mother. My uncle was almost persuaded
																																												     that you were indeed dangerously ill, and could hardly be restrained
																																												     from undertaking a journey to Ingol, or rather the most beneficial profession of any.
																																												     My uncle had an idea of his being educated as an advocate, that through
																																												     his interest he might become a judge. But, besides that he is not Moritz? Probably you do not; I
																																												     will relate her history, therefore, in a few words. Madame Moritz, her
																																												     mother, was a widow with four children, of whom Justine was the third.
																																												     This girl had alce and England. Justine, thus received in our family, learned the
																																												     duties of a servant; a condition which, in our fortunate country, does
																																												     not include the idea of ignorance, and a sacrifice ot she made any
																																												     professions, I never heard one pass her lips; but you could see by her
																																												     eyes that she almost adored her protectress. Although her disposition
																																												     was gay, and in many respects incaths of her
																																												     favourites was a judgment from heaven to chastise her partiality. She
																																												     was a Roman Catholic; and I believe her confessor confirmed the idea
																																												     which she had conceived. Accordingly, a few months after your departure
																																												     for Ingolstadt, Justine was cthrew Madame Moritz into a decline, which at first increased
																																												     her irritability, but she is now at peace for ever. She died on the
																																												     first approach of cold weather, at the beginning of this lasrs of age.

																																												     “Now, dear Victor, I dare say you wish to be indulged in a little gossip
																																												     concerning the good people of Geneva. The pretty Miss Mansfield has
																																												     already received the congratulatly sister, Manon,
																																												     married M. Duvillard, the rich banker, last autumn. Your favourite
																																												     schoolfellow, Louis Manoir, has suffered several misfortunes since the
																																												     departure of Clerval from Geneva.ZA.

																																												     “Geneva, March 18th, 17—.”

																																												            *       *       *       *       *

																																													    “Dear, dear Elizabeth!” I exclaimed when I had read her letter, “I will
																																													    write instantly, af a chemical instrument would renew all the agony of my nervous
																																													    symptoms. Henry saw this, and had removed all my apparatus from my view.
																																													    He had also changed my apartment; for he perceived tesire, as I evidently saw, of drawing me
																																													    out. What could I do? s, yet dared not exhibit the pain I felt.
																																													    Clerval, whose eyes and feelings were always quick in discerning the
																																													    sensations of others, declined the subject, alleging, in excuse, his
																																													    total ignent approbation of M. Waldman. “D—n the
																																													    fellow!” cried he; “why, M. Clerval, I assure you he has outstript us
																																													    all. Aye, stare if you please; but it is nevertheless true. A yso annoying to me.

																																													    Clerval was no natural philosopher. His imagination was too vivid for
																																													    the minutiæ of science. Languages were his principal study; and he
																																													    sought, by acquiring their elemars to consist in a warm sun and
																																													    garden of roses,—in the smiles and frowns of a fair enemy, and the fire
																																													    that consumes your own heart. How different from the manly and heroical
																																													    poetry o however, was spent cheerfully;
																																													    and although the spring was uncommonly late, when it came, its beauty
																																													    compensated for its dilatoriness.

																																													    The month of May had already commenced, and I expectof children.
																																													    Excellent friend! how sincerely did you love me, and endeavour to
																																													    elevate my mind, until it was on a level with your own. A selfish
																																													    pursuit had cramped and narrowed me, until your gentleness and affection
																																													    warmed and opened my senses; I bec to amuse me, while he expressed the sensations that
																																													    filled his soul. The resources of his mind on this occasion were truly
																																													    astonishing: his conversation was full of imagination; and very ot tempted to write only a few lines,
																																													    merely mentioning the day on which I should expect you. But that would
																																													    be a cruel kindness, and I dare not do it. What would be your surprise,
																																													    my son, w
																																													    circumstances of the transaction.

																																													    “Last Thursday (May 7th) I, my niece, and your two brothers, went to
																																													    walk in Plainpalais. The evening was warm and serene, and we prolonged
																																													    our walk not return.

																																													    “This account rather alarmed us, and we continued to search for him
																																													    until night fell, when Elizabeth conjectured that he might have returned
																																													    to the house. He was not there.iculty. When she again
																																													    lived, it was only to weep and sigh. She told me, that that same evening
																																													    William had teazed her to let him wear a very valuable miniature that
																																													    she possessed of your mooding thoughts of vengeance against the assassin,
																																													    but with feelings of peace and gentleness, that will heal, instead of
																																													    festering the wounds of our minds. Enter the house of mourning, my
																																													    friend, but with kindness and affection for those who love you, he letter on the
																																													    table, and covered my face with my hands.

																																													    “My dear Frankenstein,” exclaimed Henry, when he perceived me weep with
																																													    bitterness, “are you always to be unhappy? Myest sufferers, and for them time is the only consolation.
																																													    Those maxims of the Stoics, that death was no evil, and that the mind of
																																													    man ought to be superior to despair on the eternal absence altered every thing might be during that time? One
																																													    sudden and desolating change had taken place; but a thousand little
																																													    circumstances might have by degrees worked other alterations which,
																																													    amy native town. I discovered more distinctly the black sides
																																													    of Jura, and the bright summit of Mont Blânc; I wept like a child: “Dear
																																													    mountains! my own beautiful lake! how do you welcoand dim scene of evil,
																																													    and I foresaw obscurely that I was destined to become the most wretched
																																													    of human beings. Alas! I prophesied truly, and failed only in one single
																																													    circumstance, that in low hill,
																																													    that I might observe its progress. It advanced; the heavens were
																																													    clouded, and I soon felt the rain coming slowly in large drops, but its
																																													    violence quickly increased.

																																													    I quitted my seat, and walked on, although the darkness and storm
																																													    increasedm enlightened Jura with faint flashes; and another darkened
																																													    and sometimes disclosed the Môle, a peaked mountain to the east of the
																																													    lake.

																																													    While I watched the storm, so beautiful yet terrif convinced of its truth; my
																																													    teeth chattered, and I was forced to lean against a tree for support.
																																													    The figure passed me quickly, and I lost it in the gloom. Nothing in
																																													    human shape could haveind the events which I had until now sought to forget: the whole
																																													    train of my progress towards the creation; the appearance of the work of
																																													    my own hands alive at my bed side; its departure. T own
																																													    vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced to destroy
																																													    all that was dear to me.

																																													    Day dawned; and I directed my steps towards the town. The gates were
																																													    open; and I hastenngs of insanity. Besides, the strange nature of the animal would
																																													    elude all pursuit, even if I were so far credited as to persuade my
																																													    relatives to commence it. Besides, of what use would be pursuit? Who
																																													    could arrest a creature capable of scaling the ovetle-piece. It was an historical subject, painted at my father’s
																																													    desire, and represented Caroline Beaufort in an agony of despair,
																																													    kneeling by the coffin of her dead father. Her garb wasl be your welcome.
																																													    Our father looks so sorrowful: this dreadful event seems to have revived
																																													    in his mind his grief on the death of Mamma. Poor Elizabeth also is
																																													    quite inconsolable.” Ernediscovered. No one would believe it at first; and even now Elizabeth
																																													    will not be convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence. Indeed, who
																																													    would credit that Justine Moritz, who was so amiablrel she had worn on the night of the murder, had discovered in her
																																													    pocket the picture of my mother, which had been judged to be the
																																													    temptation of the murderer. The servant instantly shewed ster, had not Ernest exclaimed, “Good God,
																																													    Papa! Victor says that he knows who was the murderer of poor William.”

																																													    “We do also, unfortunately,” replied my father; “for ind, in this assurance, I
																																													    calmed myself, expecting the trial with eagerness, but without
																																													    prognosticating an evil result.

																																													    We were soon joined by Elizabeth. Time had made great alterations in her
																																													    form since I had last beheld her. Six years before she hadhe, “fills me
																																													    with hope. You perhaps will find some means to justify my poor guiltless
																																													    Justine. Alas! who is safe, if she be convicted of crime? I rely on her
																																													    innocence as certainly as iced in so deadly a manner, rendered me hopeless and
																																													    despairing.” She wept.

																																													    “Sweet niece,” said my father, “dry your tears. If she is, as you
																																													    believe, innocent, rely on theld make the murder memorable in horror.
																																													    Justine also was a girl of merit, and possessed qualities which promised
																																													    to render her life happy: now all was to be obliterated in an
																																													    ignominious grcence, and did not tremble, although gazed on and execrated by
																																													    thousands; for all the kindness which her beauty might otherwise have
																																													    excited, was obliterated in the minds of the spectators ion seemed to attest her utter
																																													    guiltlessness.

																																													    The trial began; and after the advocate against her had stated the
																																													    charge, several witnesses were called. Several strange facts combined
																																													    againthe child had been missed, she had placed
																																													    round his neck, a murmur of horror and indignation filled the court.

																																													    Justine was called on for her defence. As the trial had proceeded, her
																																													    countenance had altered. Surprise, horror, and misery, were strongly

																																													    and I hope the character I have always borne will incline my judges to a
																																													    favourable interpretation, where any circumstance appears doubtful or
																																													    suspicious.”

																																													    She then related that, by td when questioned by
																																													    the market-woman, was not surprising, since she had passed a sleepless
																																													    night, and the fate of poor William was yet uncertain. Concerning the
																																													    picture she could give no a. I beg permission to have a few witnesses examined concerning my
																																													    character; and if their testimony shall not overweigh my supposed guilt,
																																													    I must be condemned, although I would pledge my saed
																																													    indecent in me to come forward on this occasion; but when I see a
																																													    fellow-creature about to perish through the cowardice of her pretended
																																													    friends, I wish to be allowed to speak, that I ma was beloved by all the family. She
																																													    was warmly attached to the child who is now dead, and acted towards him
																																													    like a most affectionate mother. For my own part, I do not hesitate to
																																													    say, that,ept as
																																													    Elizabeth spoke, but she did not answer. My own agitation and anguish
																																													    was extreme during the whole trial. I believed in her innocence; I knew
																																													    it. Could the dæmon, who had (I did not for a minute doubt) murdered my
																																													    brother, also in his hellish sthe fangs of remorse tore my bosom, and would not
																																													    forego their hold.

																																													    I passed a night of unmingled wretchedness. In the morning I went to the
																																													    court; my lips and throat were parched. I dareea of the
																																													    heart-sickening despair that I then endured. The person to whom I
																																													    addressed myself added, that Justine had already confessed her guilt.
																																													    “That evidence,” he observed, “see my
																																													    cousin. My father wished her not to go; but said, that he left it to her
																																													    own judgment and feelings to decide. “Yes,” said Elizabeth, “I will go,
																																													    although she is guilty; aDo you also
																																													    join with my enemies to crush me?” Her voice was suffocated with sobs.

																																													    “Rise, my poor girl,” said Elizabeth, “why do you kneel, if you are
																																													    innocent? I am not on I continued
																																													    obdurate. Dear lady, I had none to support me; all looked on me as a
																																													    wretch doomed to ignominy and perdition. What could I do? In an evil
																																													    hour I subscribed to a lie; and now only am I truly miserable.”

																																													    She paused, weeping, and then co not mourn, my dear girl; I will every where
																																													    proclaim your innocence, and force belief. Yet you must die; you, my
																																													    playfellow, my companion, my more than sister. I never can survive so
																																													    horrinother is immediately deprived of life in a
																																													    slow torturing manner; then the executioners, their hands yet reeking
																																													    with the blood of innocence, believe that they have done a great deed.
																																													    Theyould conceal the horrid anguish that possessed me. Despair! Who
																																													    dared talk of that? The poor victim, who on the morrow was to pass the
																																													    dreary boundary between life and death, felt not as I eard that you had
																																													    confessed, he did not credit it.”

																																													    “Im. In these last moments I feel the sincerest gratitude
																																													    towards those who think of me with kindness. How sweet is the affectioith difficulty
																																													    repressed her bitter tears. She embraced Elizabeth, and said, in a voice
																																													    of half-suppressed emotion, “Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth, my
																																													    beloved and only friend;usin! such were your thoughts, mild and gentle as your own
																																													    dear eyes and voice. But I—I was a wretch, and none ever conceived of
																																													    the misery that I then endured.


																																													    END OF VOL. I.




																																													    FRANKENSTEIN;

																																													    OR,

																																													    THE MODERN PROMETHEUS.


																																													        IN THREE VOLUMES. Justine died; she rested; and I was alive. The blood flowed
																																														freely in my veins, but a weight of despair and remorse pressed on my
																																														heart, which nothing could remove. Sleep fled from my eyesok back upon the past with
																																														self-satisfaction, and from thence to gather promise of new hopes, I
																																														was seized by remorse and the sense of guilt, which hurried me away to
																																														a hell of intense tortpiness by an appearance of immoderate grief? It is also a duty owed
																																														to yourself; for excessive sorrow prevents improvement or enjoyment, or
																																														even the discharge of daily usefulness, without w
																																														o’clock, and the impossibility of remaining on the lake after that
																																														hour, had rendered our residence within the walls of Geneva very irksome
																																														to me. I was now free. Often, after the restI except
																																														some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and interrupted croaking was heard
																																														only when I approached the shore—often, I say, I was tempted to plunge
																																														into the silent lake, that the watinguished every hope. I had been the author of
																																														unalterable evils; and I lived in daily fear, lest the monster whom I
																																														had created should perpetrate some new wickedness. I had an obscure
																																														feeling that all was not over, and that he would still commit some
																																														lth was deeply
																																														shaken by the horror of the recent events. Elizabeth was sad and
																																														desponding; she no longer took delight in her ordinary occupations; all
																																														pleasure seemed to her sacrilege towaable death of
																																														Justine Moritz, I no longer see the world and its works as they before
																																														appeared to me. Before, I looked upon the accounts of vice and
																																														injustice, that I read in books or heard I feel she was innocent; you are of the same opinion, and that
																																														confirms me. Alas! Victor, when falsehood can look so like the truth,
																																														who can assure themselves of certain happiness? I feel ahave affected me, God knows how deeply;
																																														but I am not so wretched as you are. There is an expression of despair,
																																														and sometimes of revenge, in your countenance, that makes me tremble. Be
																																														calmerenity. It was from
																																														this cause that he had removed to the country; and, induced by the same
																																														motive, he now proposed that we should all make an excursion to the
																																														valley of Chamounix. I had been there before, but Elizabeth and Ernest
																																														never had; and both the precipices of piny mountains; the
																																														impetuous Arve, and cottages every here and there peeping forth from
																																														among the trees, formed a scene of singular beauty. But it was augmented
																																														and rendeSoon after we entered the valley of Chamounix. This valley
																																														is more wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and picturesque as
																																														that of Servox, through which we had just passed. The high At other
																																														times I spurred on the animal before my companions, that I might forget
																																														them, the world, and, more than all, myself. When at a distance, I
																																														alighted, and threw myself on the grass, ained many hours at the window, watching the pallid lightning
																																														that played above Mont Blânc, and listening to the rushing of the Arve,
																																														which ran below my window.




																																														CHAPTER II.


																																														The next d in the evening, fatigued, but less
																																														unhappy, and conversed with my family with more cheerfulness than had
																																														been my custom for some time. My father was pleased, and Elizabeth
																																														overjoyed. âmit
																																														of Montanvert. I remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous
																																														and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw it.
																																														It had then filled me with a sublime ecstacy that gave wings to the
																																														soul, and allowed it to soar from then
																																														and strewed on the ground; some entirely destroyed, others bent, leaning
																																														upon the jutting rocks of the mountain, or transversely upon other
																																														trees. The path, as you ascend higher, is inter the objects around me. Alas! why does man boast of
																																														sensibilities superior to those apparent in the brute; it only renders
																																														them more necessary beings. If our impulses were confined to hungethe sea of ice. A mist covered
																																														both that and the surrounding mountains. Presently a breeze dissipated
																																														the cloud, and I descended upon the glacier. The surface is very uneven,
																																														rising like thir icy and glittering peaks
																																														shone in the sunlight over the clouds. My heart, which was before
																																														sorrowful, now swelled with something like joy; I exclaimed—“Wandering
																																														spirits, if indeI had created. I trembled with rage and horror, resolving to wait
																																														his approach, and then close with him in mortal combat. He approached;
																																														his countenance bespoke bitter anguish, combined witor rather stay, that I may trample you to dust! and, oh, that I
																																														could, with the extinction of your miserable existence, restore those
																																														victims whom you have so diabolically murdered!”

																																														“I expected this reception,” said the dæmon. “All m devil! you reproach me with
																																														your creation; come on then, that I may extinguish the spark which I so
																																														negligently bestowed.”

																																														My rage was without bounds; I sprang on him, impelled by allt is superior to thine; my joints
																																														more supple. But I will not be tempted to set myself in opposition to
																																														thee. I am thy creature, and I will be even mild and docile to my
																																														natural lord and ki benevolent; my soul glowed with love and
																																														humanity: but am I not alone, miserably alone? You, my creator, abhor
																																														me; what hope can I gather from your fellow-creatures, who owe me
																																														nothing? thestruction. Shall I not then hate them who abhor me? I will keep no
																																														terms with my enemies. I am miserable, and they shall share my
																																														wretchedness. Yet it is in your power to recompense me, anen the miserable origin and author? Cursed be the
																																														day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw light! Cursed (although I
																																														curse myself) be the hands that formed you! You have made me wretchedsun is yet high in the heavens; before it descends to
																																														hide itself behind yon snowy precipices, and illuminate another world,
																																														you will have heard my story, and can decide. On you it rests, whether I
																																														quit for ever the neighbourhood of man, and lead a har curiosity, and compassion confirmed my
																																														resolution. I had hitherto supposed him to be the murderer of my
																																														brother, and I eagerly sought a confirmation or denial of this opinion.
																																														For the firsember the original æra of
																																														my being: all the events of that period appear confused and indistinct.
																																														A strange multiplicity of sensations seized me, and I saw, felt, heard,
																																														and smelt, at the ut I now found that I could wander on at liberty, with no
																																														obstacles which I could not either surmount or avoid. The light became
																																														more and more oppressive to me; and, the heat wearying me ashese were insufficient to secure me from the dews of
																																														night. I was a poor, helpless, miserable wretch; I knew, and could
																																														distinguish, nothing; but, feeling pain invade me on all sides, I sat the ground. No distinct ideas
																																														occupied my mind; all was confused. I felt light, and hunger, and
																																														thirst, and darkness; innumerable sounds rung in my ears, and on all
																																														sides various scents saluted me: the only object that I could
																																														distinguish was the brigen intercepted the light from my eyes. I began also to observe, with
																																														greater accuracy, the forms that surrounded me, and to perceive the
																																														boundaries of the radiant roof of light which canopithe herb, and, by degrees, one herb from another. I found that the
																																														sparrow uttered none but harsh notes, whilst those of the blackbird and
																																														thrush were sweet and enticing.

																																														“One day, whe itself became inflamed. I reflected on this; and, by touching
																																														the various branches, I discovered the cause, and busied myself in
																																														collecting a great quantity of wood, that I might dry it, a to me in my food; for I found
																																														some of the offals that the travellers had left had been roasted, and
																																														tasted much more savoury than the berries I gathered from the trees. I
																																														tried, therefore,rs to the serious consideration of
																																														this difficulty; but I was obliged to relinquish all attempt to supply
																																														it; and, wrapping myself up in my cloak, I struck across the wood
																																														towards the settied me. But I was enchanted by the appearance
																																														of the hut: here the snow and rain could not penetrate; the ground was
																																														dry; and it presented to me then as exquisite and divine a retreat as
																																														Pandæmonium appeared to the dæmons of hell after their suffering this appear! the
																																														huts, the neater cottages, and stately houses, engaged my admiration by
																																														turns. The vegetables in the gardens, the milk and cheese that I saw
																																														placed at the windows of some ught experience, I
																																														dared not enter it. My place of refuge was constructed of wood, but so
																																														low, that I could with difficulty sit upright in it. No wood, however,
																																														was placed on the earth, whi a clear
																																														pool of water. One part was open, and by that I had crept in; but now I
																																														covered every crevice by which I might be perceived with stones and
																																														wood, yet in such a manner that I might its vicinity to the chimney of the cottage it was tolerably
																																														warm.

																																														“Being thus provided, I resolved to reside in this hovel, until
																																														something should occur which might alter my determinatd farm-house servants to be. Yet she was meanly dressed, a
																																														coarse blue petticoat and a linen jacket being her only garb; her fair
																																														hair was plaited, but not adorned; she looked patient, yet ice, a small room was visible, white-washed and clean, but very
																																														bare of furniture. In one corner, near a small fire, sat an old man,
																																														leaning his head on his hands in a disconsolate attitude. The young girl
																																														was occupied in arranging the cottage; but pre gentle manners of the girl enticed
																																														my love. He played a sweet mournful air, which I perceived drew tears
																																														from the eyes of his amiable companion, of which the old man took no
																																														notice, until  roots. After he had been employed thus about an
																																														hour, the young woman joined him, and they entered the cottage together.

																																														“The old man had, in the mean time, been pensive; but, on the ckly shut in; but, to my extreme wonder, I found that the
																																														cottagers had a means of prolonging light, by the use of tapers, and was
																																														delighted to find, that the setting of the sun did not put not sleep. I thought of the occurrences
																																														of the day. What chiefly struck me was the gentle manners of these
																																														people; and I longed to join them, but dared not. I remembered too well
																																														the treatrious
																																														laborious occupations within. The old man, whom I soon perceived to be
																																														blind, employed his leisure hours on his instrument, or in
																																														contemplation. Nothing could exceed the love and respthey had a fire to warm them when chill, and delicious viands
																																														when hungry; they were dressed in excellent clothes; and, still more,
																																														they enjoyed one another’s company and speech, interchanging each day
																																														looks of affection and kindness. What did theignantly, especially the two younger cottagers; for
																																														several times they placed food before the old man, when they reserved
																																														none for themselves.

																																														“This trait of kindness moved me sensibly.t a great part of each day in
																																														collecting wood for the family fire; and, during the night, I often took
																																														his tools, the use of which I quickly discovered, and brought home
																																														firing sufficient fndeed a godlike
																																														science, and I ardently desired to become acquainted with it. But I was
																																														baffled in every attempt I made for this purpose. Their pronunciation
																																														was quick; and the words they u_,
																																														or _son_. I cannot describe the delight I felt when I learned the ideas
																																														appropriated to each of these sounds, and was able to pronounce them. I
																																														distinguished several other words, withouteir melancholy. He would talk in a
																																														cheerful accent, with an expression of goodness that bestowed pleasure
																																														even upon me. Agatha listened with respect, her eyes sometimes filled
																																														with tears, which she endeavoured to wipe away unperceived; but I
																																														generally ower that peeped out from beneath the snowy ground. Early in the
																																														morning before she had risen, he cleared away the snow that obstructed
																																														her path to the milk-house, drew water from the well,
																																														he talked. I conjectured, therefore, that he found on the paper signs
																																														for speech which he understood, and I ardently longed to comprehend
																																														these also; but how was that possible, when I did  delicate complexions: but how was I terrified, when I viewed myself
																																														in a transparent pool! At first I started back, unable to believe that
																																														it was indeed I who was reflected in the mirror; increased daily as the season advanced.

																																														“The old man, leaning on his son, walked each day at noon, when it did
																																														not rain, as I found it was called when the heavens poured forth its
																																														wate my own food
																																														and fuel for the cottage. When I returned, as often as it was necessary,
																																														I cleared their path from the snow, and performed those offices that I
																																														had seen done by Felix. I afterwm, and their reception of me. I
																																														imagined that they would be disgusted, until, by my gentle demeanour and
																																														conciliating words, I should first win their favour, and afterwards
																																														their love.

																																														“These thoughts exhilarated me, and led me to apply with freshserved
																																														better treatment than blows and execration.

																																														“The pleasant showers and genial warmth of spring greatly altered the
																																														aspect of the earth. Men, who before this change seemed to haveenses
																																														were gratified and refreshed by a thousand scents of delight, and a
																																														thousand sights of beauty.

																																														“It was on one of these days, when my cottagers periodically rested from
																																														labourâthe stranger only replied by
																																														pronouncing, in a sweet accent, the name of Felix. Her voice was
																																														musical, but unlike that of either of my friends. On hearing this word,
																																														Felix came up hastily ed with pleasure; and at that moment I
																																														thought him as beautiful as the stranger. She appeared affected by
																																														different feelings; wiping a few tears from her lovely eyes, she held
																																														out her hand ing their sorrow as the sun dissipates the
																																														morning mists. Felix seemed peculiarly happy, and with smiles of delight
																																														welcomed his Arabian. Agatha, the ever-gentle Agatha, kissed the hands
																																														of
																																														profited by the others.

																																														“As night came on, Agatha and the Arabian retired early. When they
																																														separated, Felix kissed the hand of the stranger, and said, ‘Good night,
																																														sweet Safie.’ He sat up much longer, conversing with his father; and, by
																																														tgale of the woods.

																																														“When she had finished, she gave the guitar to Agatha, who at first
																																														declined it. She played a simple air, and her voice accompanied it in
																																														sweet accents, but unlike t covered with herbage, and
																																														the green banks interspersed with innumerable flowers, sweet to the
																																														scent and the eyes, stars of pale radiance among the moonlight woods;
																																														the sun became warmer, tech, I also learned the science of letters, as it
																																														was taught to the stranger; and this opened before me a wide field for
																																														wonder and delight.

																																														“The book from which Felix instructed Safiehe wars and wonderful virtue of the early Romans—of their
																																														subsequent degeneration—of the decline of that mighty empire; of
																																														chivalry, Christianity, and kings. I heard of the discovern, a condition more abject than
																																														that of the blind mole or harmless worm. For a long time I could not
																																														conceive how one man could go forth to murder his fellow, or even why
																																														there were laws anese acquisitions; but without either he was considered, except
																																														hsome; I was not even of the same
																																														nature as man. I was more agile than they, and could subsist upon
																																														coarser diet; I bore the extremes of heat and cold with less injury to
																																														my frame; my statuvercome the sensation of pain, and that was death—a state
																																														which I feared yet did not understand. I admired virtue and good
																																														feelings, and loved the gentle manners and amiable qualities oldren; how the father
																																														doated on the smiles of the infant, and the lively sallies of the older
																																														child; how all the life and cares of the mother were wrapt up in the
																																														precious charge; how the mather had watched my
																																														infant days, no mother had blessed me with smiles and caresses; or if
																																														they had, all my past life was now a blot, a blind vacancy in which I
																																														distinguished nothing. From  which could not fail to impress itself deeply on my mind, unfolding
																																														as it did a number of circumstances each interesting and wonderful to
																																														one so utterly inexperienced as I was.

																																														“The ne cause of their ruin. He was a Turkish
																																														merchant, and had inhabited Paris for many years, when, for some reason
																																														which I could not learn, he became obnoxious to the government. He was
																																														seized and cast into prison the very day that Safie arrived from
																																														Consrollable, when he heard the decision of the court. He made, at
																																														that moment, a solemn vow to deliver him, and then looked around for the
																																														means. After many fruitless attempts to gain admittan secure him more entirely in his
																																														interests by the promise of her hand in marriage, so soon as he should
																																														be conveyed to a place of safety. Felix was too delicate to accept this
																																														offer; yet hey will prove the truth of my tale; but at present, as the
																																														sun is already far declined, I shall only have time to repeat the
																																														substance of them to you.

																																														“Safie related, that her mother wa
																																														returning to Asia, and the being immured within the walls of a harem,
																																														allowed only to occupy herself with puerile amusements, ill suited to
																																														the temper of her soul, now accustomed to grand  name of his
																																														father, sister, and himself. He had previously communicated his plan to
																																														the former, who aided the deceit by quitting his house, under the
																																														pretence of a journey, and concealed he hopes
																																														of the youthful lovers, while in his heart he had formed far other
																																														plans. He loathed the idea that his daughter should be united to a
																																														Christian; but he feared the resentment of Felix if he should appear
																																														lukewarm; for he knew that he was still if Felix was quickly discovered, and De Lacey and Agatha were thrown
																																														into prison. The news reached Felix, and roused him from his dream of
																																														pleasure. His blind and aged father, and his gentle place; the result of which deprived them of their fortune,
																																														and condemned them to a perpetual exile from their native country.

																																														“They found a miserable asylum in the cottage in Germany,een the meed of his
																																														virtue, he would have gloried in it: but the ingratitude of the Turk,
																																														and the loss of his beloved Safie, were misfortunes more bitter and
																																														irreparable. The arrival of thereason to believe that his residence at Leghorn
																																														had been divulged, and that he should speedily be delivered up to the
																																														French government; he had, consequently, hired a vessel to convey him
																																														tighbouring wood, where I
																																														collected my own food, and brought home firing for my protectors, I
																																														found on the ground a leathern portmanteau, containing several articles
																																														of dress and some books.ners it described, combined with lofty sentiments and
																																														feelings, which had for their object something out of self, accorded
																																														well with my experience among my protectors, and with the wants which
																																														were for ever alive in my own bosom. But I thought Werter h to
																																														solve them.

																																														“The volume of _Plutarch’s Lives_ which I possessed, contained the
																																														histories of the first founders of the ancient republics. This book had
																																														a far different effect up
																																														protectors caused these impressions to take a firm hold on my mind;
																																														perhaps, if my first introduction to humanity had been made by a young
																																														soldier, burning for glory and slaughter, I shoulcquire knowledge from
																																														beings of a superior nature: but I was wretched, helpless, and alone.
																																														Many times I considered Satan as the fitter emblem of my condition; for
																																														often, like him, when I vis
																																														related in them which bears reference to my accursed origin; the whole
																																														detail of that series of disgusting circumstances which produced it is
																																														set in view; the minutest description of my persuaded myself that when they should become
																																														acquainted with my admiration of their virtues, they would compassionate
																																														me, and overlook my personal deformity. Could they turn from their door
																																														one, however monstrous, who solicited their compassion and fra few more months
																																														should have added to my wisdom.

																																														“Several changes, in the mean time, took place in the cottage. The
																																														presence of Safie diffused happiness among its inhabitants; and I a“I endeavoured to crush these fears, and to fortify myself for the trial
																																														which in a few months I resolved to undergo; and sometimes I allowed my
																																														thoughts, unchecked by reason, to ramblethe flowers, the birds, and all the gay apparel of
																																														summer; when those deserted me, I turned with more attention towards the
																																														cottagers. Their happiness was not decreased by the absence of sured
																																														kindness and sympathy; but I did not believe myself utterly unworthy of
																																														it.

																																														“The winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken
																																														place since I awoke into life. Mad nothing terrible in it; I thought, therefore,
																																														that if, in the absence of his children, I could gain the good-will and
																																														mediation of the old De Lacy, I might, by his means, be tolerated byiled me, and I sunk to the ground. Again I rose; and, exerting
																																														all the firmness of which I was master, removed the planks which I had
																																														placed before my hovel to conceal my retreat. The fresh air revived me,
																																														and, with renewed determination, I approached t only that I need.’

																																														“I sat down, and a silence ensued. I knew that every minute was precious
																																														to me, yet I remained irresolute in what manner to commence the
																																														interview; when the olair. To be friendless is indeed to be unfortunate; but the
																																														hearts of men, when unprejudiced by any obvious self-interest, are full
																																														of brotherly love and charity. Rely, therefore, on your ho I
																																														feel so many overwhelming terrors. I tenderly love these friends; I
																																														have, unknown to them, been for many months in the habits of daily
																																														kindness towards them; but they believe that I wish, and not instigate you to virtue. I also am
																																														unfortunate; I and my family have been condemned, although innocent:
																																														judge, therefore, if I do not feel for your misfortunes.’

																																														“‘Hoert me in the hour of trial!’

																																														“‘Great God!’ exclaimed the old man, ‘who are you?’

																																														“At that instant the cottage door was opened, and Felix, Safie, and
																																														Agatha ent instant, did I not
																																														extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly bestowed? I
																																														know not; despair had not yet taken possession of me; my feelings were
																																														those of rage and revenge. I could with pleasure have destroyed the
																																														cottage and its inhashone in mockery, and the bare trees waved their
																																														branches above me: now and then the sweet voice of a bird burst forth
																																														amidst the universal stillness. All, save I, were at rest or in
																																														enjoym sent me forth to this insupportable misery.

																																														“The sun rose; I heard the voices of men, and knew that it was
																																														impossible to return to my retreat during that day. Accordingly I hid
																																														myselffternoon I sank into a profound
																																														sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow me to be visited by
																																														peaceful dreams. The horrible scene of the preceding day was for ever
																																														acting before my eyely, apprehending
																																														some dreadful misfortune. The inside of the cottage was dark, and I
																																														heard no motion; I cannot describe the agony of this suspence.

																																														“Presently two countrymen passed by;ix, ‘we can never again inhabit
																																														your cottage. The life of my father is in the greatest danger, owing to
																																														the dreadful circumstance that I have related. My wife and my sister
																																														will never rosom, and I did not strive to controul
																																														them; but, allowing myself to be borne away by the stream, I bent my
																																														mind towards injury and death. When I thought of my friends, of the mild
																																														voice of De Lacy, the gentle eyes of Agatha, and the exquisite beauty oll bounds of reason and reflection. I lighted the
																																														dry branch of a tree, and danced with fury around the devoted cottage,
																																														my eyes still fixed on the western horizon, the edge of which the moisfortunes; but to me, hated
																																														and despised, every country must be equally horrible. At length the
																																														thought of you crossed my mind. I learned from your papers that you were
																																														my father, my creatas my
																																														only guide. I did not know the names of the towns that I was to pass
																																														through, nor could I ask information from a single human being; but I
																																														did not despair. From you only could I hope the cause of my being! The mildness
																																														of my nature had fled, and all within me was turned to gall and
																																														bitterness. The nearer I approached to your habitation, the more deeply
																																														did I feel the sped only when I was
																																														secured by night from the view of man. One morning, however, finding
																																														that my path lay through a deep wood, I ventured to continue my journey
																																														after the sun had risen; the day, which was one of the first of spring,
																																														cheered even me by t
																																														river, when suddenly her foot slipt, and she fell into the rapid stream.
																																														I rushed from my hiding-place, and, with extreme labour from the force
																																														of the current, saved her, and dragged her the carried, at
																																														my body, and fired. I sunk to the ground, and my injurer, with increased
																																														swiftness, escaped into the wood.

																																														“This was then the reward of my benevolence! I had saved a humhad entered my shoulder,
																																														and I knew not whether it had remained there or passed through; at any
																																														rate I had no means of extracting it. My sufferings were augmented also
																																														by the oppressive seno unhappy to
																																														enjoy the gentle breezes of evening, or the prospect of the sun setting
																																														behind the stupendous mountains of Jura.

																																														“At this time a slight sleep relieved me from the pain of and said, ‘Child, what is the meaning of this? I do not intend to
																																														hurt you; listen to me.’

																																														“He struggled violently; ‘Let me go,’ he cried; ‘monster! ugly wretch!
																																														yoled, and loaded me with epithets which carried
																																														despair to my heart: I grasped his throat to silence him, and in a
																																														moment he lay dead at my feet.

																																														“I gazed on my victim, and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish
																																														triumph: clapping my hands, I  only
																																														wonder that at that moment, instead of venting my sensations in
																																														exclamations and agony, I did not rush among mankind, and perish in the
																																														attempt to destroy them.

																																														“While I was overlaced
																																														the portrait securely in one of the folds of her dress.

																																														“For some days I haunted the spot where these scenes had taken place;
																																														sometimes wishing to see you, sometimes resolved to  of the same species,
																																														and have the same defects. This being you must create.”




																																														CHAPTER IX.


																																														The being finished speaking, and fixed his looks upon me in expectation
																																														of a reply. But Int to reason with you. I am malicious because I am miserable;
																																														am I not shunned and hated by all mankind? You, my creator, would tear
																																														me to pieces, and triumph; remember that, and tell me wheeded—

																																														“I intended to reason. This passion is detrimental to me; for you do not
																																														reflect that you are the cause of its excess. If any being felt emotions
																																														of benevolence towards me, y; let me feel gratitude towards you for one
																																														benefit! Let me see that I excite the sympathy of some existing thing;
																																														do not deny me my request!”

																																														I was moved. I shuddered when I thought of the possible consequences of
																																														my consent; but I felt that theer see us
																																														again: I will go to the vast wilds of South America. My food is not that
																																														of man; I do not destroy the lamb and the kid, to glut my appetite;
																																														acorns and berries afford me sufficiene field will be your only
																																														companions. How can you, who long for the love and sympathy of man,
																																														persevere in this exile? You will return, and again seek their kindness,
																																														and you will meet withd him, and
																																														sometimes felt a wish to console him; but when I looked upon him, when I
																																														saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart sickened, and my
																																														feelings were altered to those of hoIf I have no ties and no affections, hatred and vice
																																														must be my portion; the love of another will destroy the cause of my
																																														crimes, and I shall become a thing, of whose existence every one wiinaccessible precipices, was a being possessing faculties it would be
																																														vain to cope with. After a long pause of reflection, I concluded, that
																																														the justice due both to him and my fellow-creatuto your home, and commence your labours: I shall watch their
																																														prand every here and there a broken tree lay on the
																																														ground: it was a scene of wonderful solemnity, and stirred strange
																																														thoughts within me. I wept bitterly; and, clasping my hands in agony, I
																																														tention of my father in
																																														coming had been to divert my mind, and to restore me to my lost
																																														tranquillity; but the medicine had been fatal. And, unable to account
																																														for the excess of misery I appe of the hellish hypocrites. All
																																														pleasures of earth and sky passed before me like a dream, and that
																																														thought only had to me the reality of life. Can you wonder, that
																																														sometimes a kind of insan promote me?——

																																														    Paradise Lost.




																																														    CHAPTER I.


																																														    Day after day, week after week, passed away on my return to Geneva; and
																																														    I could not collect the courage to recommence my work. I much restored; and my spirits, when
																																														    unchecked by the memory of my unhappy promise, rose proportionably. My
																																														    father saw this change with pleasure, and he turned his thoughts towards
																																														    the best re me to some degree of composure; and, on my return, I met the
																																														    salutations of my friends with a readier smile and a more cheerful
																																														    heart.

																																														    It was after my return from one of these rambles that my father, calling
																																														    me aside, thus addressed me:—

																																														    “s the experience of man,
																																														    that what I conceived to be the best assistants to my plan may have
																																														    entirely destroyed it. You, perhaps, regard her as your sister, without
																																														    any wish that she might ur mind, that I wish to dissipate. Tell me,
																																														    therefore, whether you object to an immediate solemnization of the
																																														    marriage. We have been unfortunate, and recent events have drawn us from
																																														    that as one of horror and dismay.
																																														    I was bound by a solemn promise, which I had not yet fulfilled, and
																																														    dared not break; or, if I did, what manifold miseries might not impend
																																														    over me and my devoteing into a long correspondence with those philosophers
																																														    of that country, whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable
																																														    use to me in my present undertaking. The latter method of obtaisat down for life within the walls of my native town.

																																														    I urged my entreaty with earnestness, and my father was easily induced
																																														    to comply; for a more indulgent and less dictatorial parent didears,” said he, “will pass swiftly, and it will be the last delay
																																														    that will oppose itself to your happiness. And, indeed, I earnestly
																																														    desire that period to arrive, when we shall all be united, and neither
																																														    hopes or fears arise to disturb our domore my tranquillity.

																																														    I now made arrangements for my journey; but one feeling haunted me,
																																														    which filled me with fear and agitation. During my absence I should
																																														    leave my friends unconscious ofs of my departure, and only
																																														    regretted that she had not the same opportunities of enlarging her
																																														    experience, and cultivating her understanding. She wept, however, as she
																																														    bade me farewell, andtions, I passed through
																																														    many beautiful and majestic scenes; but my eyes were fixed and
																																														    unobserving. I could only think of the bourne of my travels, and the
																																														    work which was to occupy me whilstein, wherefore are you
																																														    desponding and sorrowful?” In truth, I was occupied by gloomy thoughts,
																																														    and neither saw the descent of the evening star, nor the golden sun-rise
																																														    reflected in thehe fifth from our departure from
																																														    Strasburgh, arrived at Mayence. The course of the Rhine below Mayence
																																														    becomes much more picturesque. The river descends rapidly, and winds
																																														    between hills, no agitated by gloomy feelings, even I was pleased.
																																														    I lay at the bottom of the boat, and, as I gazed on the cloudless blue
																																														    sky, I seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which I had long been a
																																														    stranger. And if these were my sensations, who can describe thoislands that
																																														    relieve the eye by their gay appearance; I have seen this lake agitated
																																														    by a tempest, when the wind tore up whirlwinds of water, and gave you an
																																														    idea of what the water-spout muhe sensibility of his heart.
																																														    His soul overflowed with ardent af devoted and wondrous nature that the worldly-minded teach us to
																																														    look for only in the imagination. But even human sympathies wons fanciful and
																																														    magnificent, which formed a world, whose existence depended on the life
																																														    of its creator; has this mind perished? Does it now only exist in my
																																														    memory? No, it is not thus; you; and we resolved to
																																														    post the remainder of our way; for the wind was contrary, and the stream
																																														    of the river was too gentle to aid us.

																																														    Our journey here lost the interest arising from beautifer famed in English history.




																																														    CHAPTER II.


																																														    London was our present point of rest; we determined to remain several
																																														    months in this wonderful and celebrated city. Clerval desired the
																																														    intercourse of the men of genius and talent who flourished at this tiect in which my interest was
																																														    so terribly profound. Company was irksome to me; when alone, I could
																																														    fill my mind with the sights of heaven and earth; the voice of Henry
																																														    soothed me, and I couls was my sorrowful and dejected mien. I tried to conceal
																																														    this as much as possible, that I might not debar him from the pleasures
																																														    natural to one who was entering on a new scene of life, undinot
																																														    sufficient allurements to induce us to prolong our journey as far north
																																														    as Perth, where he resided. Clerval eagerly desired to accept this
																																														    invitation; and I, although I abhorred society new scene to us
																																														    mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the quantity of game, and the herds of
																																														    stately deer, were all novelties to us.

																																														    From thence we proceeded to Oxford. As we entered this cityadmiration. The
																																														    colleges are ancient and picturesque; the streets are almost
																																														    magnificent; and the lovely Isis, which flows beside it through meadows
																																														    of exquisite verdure, is spread forth iny soul; and I felt then that I should survive to exhibit, what I shall
																																														    soon cease to be—a miserable spectacle of wrecked humanity, pitiable to
																																														    others, and abhorrent to myself.

																																														    We passed a considerable period at Oxford, rambling among its environs,around me with a free and lofty spirit; but the iron had eaten into my
																																														    flesh, and I sank again, trembling and hopeless, into my miserable self.

																																														    We left Oxford with regret, and proceeded tosed two months in
																																														    Cumberland and Westmoreland. I could now almost fancy myself among the
																																														    Swiss mountains. The little patches of snow which yet lingered on the
																																														    northern sides of the mountainery moment from which I might otherwise have snatched repose and
																																														    peace. I waited for my letters with feverish impatience: if they were
																																														    delayed, I was miserable, and overcome by a thousand fme.

																																														    I visited Edinburgh with languid eyes and mind; and yet that city might
																																														    have interested the most unfortunate being. Clerval did not like it so
																																														    well as Oxford; for the antiquity of the ce and solitude for a short time;
																																														    and when I return, I hope it will be with a lighter heart, more
																																														    congenial to your own temper.”

																																														    Henry wished to dissuade me; but, seeing me bent on thie high sides
																																														    were continually beaten upon by the waves. The soil was barren, scarcely
																																														    affording pasture for a few miserable cows, and oatmeal for its
																																														    inhabitants, which consisted of five persons, whose gaunt and scraggy
																																														    limbs gave tokens of their miserich would, doubtless, have
																																														    occasioned some surprise, had not all the senses of the cottagers been
																																														    benumbed by want and squalid poverty. As it was, I lived ungazed at and
																																														    unmolested, hardly ecame every day more horrible and
																																														    irksome to me. Sometimes I could not prevail on myself to enter my
																																														    laboratory for several days; and at other times I toiled day and night
																																														    in order to complsecutor.
																																														    Sometimes I sat with my eyes fixed on the ground, fearing to raise them
																																														    lest they should encounter the object which I so much dreaded to behold.
																																														    I feared to wander from the sight o his own
																																														    deformity, and might he not conceive a greater abhorrence for it when it
																																														    came before his eyes in the female form? She also might turn with
																																														    disgust from him to the superior beauty ofirst time, the wickedness of my promise burst upon me; I shuddered to
																																														    think that future ages might curse me as their pest, whose selfishness
																																														    had not hesitated to buy its own peace at the p,
																																														    tore to pieces the thing on which I was engaged. The wretch saw me
																																														    destroy the creature on whose future existence he depended for
																																														    happiness, and, with a howl of devilish despair and revenge, withdrew.

																																														    I left the room, and, locking the door, made a sly conscious of its extreme profundity until my ear was suddenly
																																														    arrested by the paddling of oars near the shore, and a person landed
																																														    close to my house.

																																														    In a few minutes after, I heard thed of footsteps along the passage; the door
																																														    opened, and the wretch whom I dreaded appeared. Shutting the door, he
																																														    approached me, and said, in a smothered voice—

																																														    “You have destroyed  in cool blood, set loose upon the earth a dæmon, whose delight
																																														    is in death and wretchedness. Begone! I am firm, and your words will
																																														    only exasperate my rage.”

																																														    The monster saw my deter blast my other passions; but revenge remains—revenge, henceforth
																																														    dearer than light or food! I may die; but first you, my tyrant and
																																														    tormentor, shall curse the sun that gazes on your mied with rage
																																														    to pursue the murderer of my peace, and precipitate him into the ocean.
																																														    I walked up and down my room hastily and perturbed, while my imagination
																																														    conjured up a thousand images to torment and sting me. Why had I not
																																														    followed him, and closed 
																																														    and extinguish his malice. The prospect did not move me to fear; yet
																																														    when I thought of my beloved Elizabeth,—of her tears and endless
																																														    sorrow, when she should find her lover so barbaroue sun
																																														    rose higher, I lay down on the grass, and was overpowered by a deep
																																														    sleep. I had been awake the whole of the preceding night, my nerves were
																																														    agitated, and my eyes inflamed by watching. He said that nearly a year had elapsed since we had quitted
																																														    Switzerland, and France was yet unvisited. He entreated me, therefore,
																																														    to leave my solitary isle, and meet him at Perth, in a w next morning, at day-break, I summoned sufficient courage,
																																														    and unlocked the door of my laboratory. The remains of the half-finished
																																														    creature, whom I had destroyed, lay scattered on the flofelt as if a film
																																														    had been taken from before my eyes, and that I, for the first time, saw
																																														    clearly. The idea of renewing my labours did not for one instant occur
																																														    to me; the threat I had hearrfectly solitary: a few boats were returning
																																														    towards land, but that was then rising. But it refreshed me, and
																																														    filled me with such agreeable sensations, that I resolved to prolong my
																																														    stay on the water, and fixing the rudder in a direct position, stretcht the wind was north-east, and must have driven me far from the
																																														    coast from which I had embarked. I endeavoured to change my cosituated, my only resource was to
																																														    drive before the wind. I confscene is on the point of closing before me for ever, I shudder to
																																														    reflect on it.

																																														    Some hours passed thus; but by degrees, as the sun declined towards the
																																														    horizon, the wind died away into a appearance; but as I approached nearer, I easily
																																														    perceived the traces of cultivation. I saw vessels near the shore, and
																																														    found myself suddenly transported back to the neighbourhood of civilies that at any other time might have produced in me
																																														    a slight sensation of alarm. As it was, I merely remarked that they
																																														    spoke English; and I therefore addressed them in that language: “spitably.”

																																														    “I do not know,” said the man, “what the custom of the English may be;
																																														    but it is the custom of the Irish to hate villains.”

																																														    While this strange dialogue contKirwin is a magistrate; and
																																														    you are to give an account of the death of a gentleman who was found
																																														    murdered here last night.”

																																														    This answer startled me; but I presently recovered myself. I was
																																														    innocent; that could easily be proved: accordingly I follo all fear of ignominy or death.

																																														    I must pause here; for it requires all my fortitude to recall the memory
																																														    of the frightful events which I am about to relate, in proper detail, to
																																														    my recolle, he struck his foot against something,
																																														    and fell all his length on the ground. His companions came up to assist
																																														    him; and, by the light of their lantern, they found that he had fallen
																																														    on thesition did not in the least interest me; but
																																														    when the mark of the fingers was mentioned, I remembered the murder of
																																														    my brother, and felt myself extremely agitated; my limbs trembled, and a
																																														    man in it, push off from that part of the shore where the
																																														    corpse was afterwards found.

																																														    Another woman confirmed the account of the fishermen having brought the
																																														    body into her house; it was nody from
																																														    another place, and it was likely, that as I did not appear to know the
																																														    shore, I might have put into the harbour ignorant of the distance of the
																																														    town of —— from the place whas to the consequences of
																																														    the affair.

																																														    I entered the room wheregony, that faintly reminds me of the anguish of the
																																														    recognition. The trial, the presence of the magistrate and witnesses,
																																														    passed like a dream from my memory, when I saw the lifeless form of entreated
																																														    my attendants to assist me in the destruction of the fiend by whom I was
																																														    tormented; and, at others, I felt the fingers of the monster already
																																														    grasping my neck, and screamed aloudresist so many shocks, which, like the
																																														    turning of the wheel, continually renewed the torture.

																																														    But I was doomed to live; and, in two months, found myself as awaking
																																														    from a dream, in a prisoin a chair beside me.
																																														    She was a hired nurse, the wife of one ofturnkeys, and her
																																														    countenance expressed all those bad qualities which often characterize
																																														    that class. The lines of her face werowever, that’s none of my business, I
																																														    am sent to nurse you, and get you well; I do my duty with a safe
																																														    conscience, it were well if every body did the same.”

																																														    I turned with loathing rescribed medicines, and the old woman prepared them
																																														    for me; but utter carelessness was visible in the first, and the
																																														    expression of brutality was strongly marked in the visage of the second.
																																														    Who could be interested in the fate of a murderer, but the halected; but his visits were short, and at long
																																														    intervals.

																																														    One day, when I was gradually recovering, I was seated in a chair, my
																																														    eyes half open, and my cheeks livid like those in death, I wn is nothing to me: on the whole
																																														    earth there is no comfort which I am capable of receiving.”

																																														    “I know that the sympathy of a stranger can be but of little relief to
																																														    one borne down avidence can
																																														    easily be brought to free you from the criminal charge.”

																																														    “That is my least concern: I am, by a course of strange events, become
																																														    the most miserable of mortals. Persecutess concerning me. I suppose some
																																														    astonishment was exhibited in my countenance; for Mr. Kirwin hastened to
																																														    say—

																																														    “It was not until a day or two after your illness that I thought of
																																														    e
																																														    misery, and taunt me with the death of Clerval, as a new incitement for
																																														    me to comply with his hellish desires. I put my hand before my eyes, and
																																														    cried out in agony—

																																														    “Oh! take him d pleased the magistrate; perhaps he
																																														    thought that my former exclamation was a momentary return of delirium,
																																														    and now he instantly resumed his former benevolence. He rose, and
																																														    quitted the room with my nurse, and in a moment my father entered it.

																																														    Nothingshed tears.

																																														    “Alas! yes, my father,” replied I; “some destiny of the most horrible
																																														    kind hangs over me, and I must live to fulfil it, or surely I should
																																														    have died on the coffin o
																																														    which these reflections threw me made my friends dread a dangerous
																																														    relapse. Alas! why did they preserve so miserable and detested a life?
																																														    It was surely that I might fulfil my destiny, whicto the
																																														    county-town, where the court was held. Mr. Kirwin charged himself with
																																														    every care of collecting witnesses, and arranging my defence. I was
																																														    spared the disgrace of appearing publicly a I did not
																																														    participate in these feelings; for to me the walls of a dungeon or a
																																														    palace were alike hateful. The cup of life was poisoned for ever; and
																																														    although the sun shone upon me, as upongeneral state of feeling was a torpor, in which a
																																														    prison was as welcome a residence as the divinest scene in nature; and
																																														    these fits were seldom interrupted, but by paroxysms of anguish and
																																														    e world.”

																																														    My father easily acceded to my desire; and, after having taken leave of
																																														    Mr. Kirwin, we hastened to Dublin. I felt as if I was relieved from a
																																														    heavy weight, when the packet sailed with a fair wind from Ireland, and
																																														    I had quitted for ever earest
																																														    companion, had fallen a victim to me and the monster of my creation. I
																																														    repassed, in my memory, my whole life; my quiet happiness while residing
																																														    with my family in Geneva, the death ofs enabled to gain the rest necessary for the
																																														    preservation of life. Oppressed by the recollection of my various
																																														    misfortunes, I now took a double dose, and soon slept profoundly. But
																																														    sleep di which made me again feel the pang I endured when I
																																														    gazed on his lifeless form in the inn at ——.

																																														    As for my father, his desires and exertions were bounded to the again
																																														    seeing me resy imprisonment, heard me make the same
																																														    assertion; when I thus accused myself, he sometimes seemed to desire an
																																														    explanation, and at others he appeared to consider it as caused by
																																														    delirium, aetically; “the sun and the heavens, who
																																														    have viewed my opercan bear witness of my truth. I am the
																																														    assassin of those most innocent victims; they died by my machinations. A
																																														    thousand times would I have shed my own blood, drop by drop, to have
																																														    saved the utmost
																																														    self-violence, I curbed the imperious voice of wretchedness, which
																																														    sometimes desired to declare itself to the whole world; and my manners
																																														    were calmer and more composed than they hay, tortured
																																														    as I have been by anxious suspense; yet I hope to see peace in your
																																														    countenance, and to find that your heart is not totally devoid of
																																														    comfort and tranquillity.

																																														    “Yet I fear e to
																																														    do than to sign myself your affectionate cousin. But you aone writing what, during your absence, I have often
																																														    wished to express to you, but have never had the courage to begin.

																																														    “Y reasoning. I confess to you, my cousin, that I love you,
																																														    and that in my airy dreams of futurity you have been my constant friend
																																														    and companion. But it is your happiness I desire as well aso not let this letter disturb you; do not answer it to-morrow, l send me news of your health; and if I see but one smile on your
																																														    lips when we meet, occasioned by this or any other exertion  eyes, his cottage burnt,
																																														    his lands laid waste, and he is turned adrift, homeless, pennyless, and
																																														    alone, but free. Such would be my liberty, except that in my Elizabeth I
																																														    possessed a treasure; alas! balanced by those horrors of remorse and
																																														    guilt, whichwed _to be with me on my wedding-night_, yet he did not consider that
																																														    threat as binding him to peace in the mean time; for, as if to shew me
																																														    that he was not yet satiated with blood, he had s for contentment. I have one secret, Elizabeth, a
																																														    dreadful one; when revealed to you, it will chill your frame with
																																														    horror, and then, far from being surprised at my misery, you will only
																																														    wlasted and
																																														    miserable as I was.

																																														    The tranquillity which I now enjoyed did not endure. Memory brought
																																														    madness with it; and when I thought on what had passed, a real insanity
																																														    possessed me; som

																																														    Soon after my arrival my father spoke of my immediate marriage with my
																																														    cousin. I remained silent.

																																														    “Have you, then, some other attachment?”

																																														    “None on earth. I love Elizabeth,  we have been so cruelly deprived.”

																																														    Such were the lessons of my father. But to me the remembrance of the
																																														    threat returned: nor can you wonder, that, omnipotent as the fiend had
																																														    yet beenink within me. But I concealed
																																														    my feelings by an appearance of hilarity, that brought smiles and joy to
																																														    the countenance of my father, but hardly deceived the ever-watchful and
																																														    nicer eye of Elizabeth. She looked forward to our union with placid
																																														    contentme so near Geneva as to see my father every day; who would
																																														    still reside within the walls, for the benefit of Ernest, that he might
																																														    follow his studies at the schools.

																																														    In the mean time I tookmelancholy, and a presentiment of evil pervaded her;
																																														    and perhaps also she thought of the dreadful secret, which I had
																																														    promised to reveal to her the following day. My father was in the mean
																																														    e we saw
																																														    Mont Salêve, the pleasant banks of Montalêgre, and at a distance,
																																														    surmounting all, the beautiful Mont Blânc, and the assemblage of snowy
																																														    mountains that in vain endeavour to emul
																																														    one day at least permits me to enjoy.”

																																														    “Be happy, my dear Victor,” replied Elizabeth; “there is, I hope,
																																														    nothing to distress you; and be assured that if a lively joy is no in her eyes, but it continually gave place to
																																														    distraction and reverie.

																																														    The sun sunk lower in the heavens; we passed the river Drance, and
																																														    observed its path through the chasms of the highewe landed; and as I touched the shore, I
																																														    felt those cares and fears revive, which soon were to clasp me, and
																																														    cling to me for ever.




																																														    CHAPTER VI.


																																														    It was eight o’clock when we landed; we walked for a short time on the
																																														    shore, enjoying the transitoe shapes
																																														    of objects, a thousand fears arose in my mind. I was anxious and
																																														    watchful, while my right hand grasped a pistol which was hidden in my
																																														    bosom; every sound terrified me; but I resolvledge as to the situation of my enemy.

																																														    She left me, and I continued some time walking up and down the passages
																																														    of the house, and inspecting every corner that might afford a retreat to
																																														    my a my limbs. This
																																														    state lasted but for an instant; the scream was repeated, and I rushed
																																														    into the room.

																																														    Great God! why did I not then expire! Why am I here to relate the
																																														    destruction of the bately living, so dear, so worthy. She
																																														    had been moved from the posture in which I had first beheld her; and
																																														    now, as she lay, her head upon her arm, and a handkerchief thrown across
																																														    her face t a crowd into the room. I pointed to the
																																														    spot where he had disappeared, and we followed the track with boats;
																																														    nets were cast, and
																																														    vines.

																																														    I did not accompany them; I was exhausted: a film covered my eyes, and
																																														    my skin was parched with the heat of feveris grasp, and Ernest might be dead at his feet. This
																																														    idea made me shudder, and recalled me to action. I started up, and
																																														    resolved to return to Geneva with all possible speed.

																																														    There were no ands, gave way to every gloomy idea that arose. If I looked up,
																																														    I saw the scenes which were familiar to me in my happier time, and which
																																														    I had contemplated but the day before in the companyideous narration.

																																														    I arrived at Geneva. My father and Ernest yet lived; but the former sunk
																																														    under the tidings that I bore. I see him now, excellent and venerable
																																														    old man! his eyes wandered Melancholy followed, but by degrees I gained a clear conception of my
																																														    miseries and situation, and was then released from my prison. For they
																																														    had called me mad; and during many months, as I lect on the best means of securing him; and for this purpose, about a
																																														    month after my release, I repaired to a criminal judge in the town, and
																																														    told him that I had an accusation to make; thatfor a dream, and I have no motive for falsehood.” My manner, as I thus
																																														    addressed him, was impressive, but calm; I had formed in my own heart a
																																														    resolution to pursue my destroyer to death; and this purpose quieted my
																																														    agony, and provisionally reconcilom I
																																														    accuse, and for whose detection and punishment I call upon you to exert
																																														    your whole power. It is your duty as a magistrate, and I believe and
																																														    hope that your feelings as a man will not r?
																																														    Besides, some months have elapsed since the commission of his crimes,
																																														    and no one can conjecture to what place he has wandered, or what region
																																														    he may now inhabit.”

																																														    “I do not doubt
																																														    make up your mind to disappointment.”

																																														    “That cannot be; but all that I can say will be of little avail. My
																																														    revenge is of no moment to you; yet, while I allow it to be a vice, I
																																														    coness. He endeavoured to soothe me as a nurse does a child, and
																																														    reverted to my tale as the effects of delirium.

																																														    “Man,” I cried, “how ignorant art thou in thy pride of wisdom! CeaI provided myself with a sum of money, together with a few
																																														    jewels which had belonged to my mother, and departed.

																																														    And now my wanderings began, which are to cease but with life. I have
																																														    travemy father,
																																														    reposed. I entered it, and approached the tomb which marked their
																																														    graves. Every thing was silent, except the leaves of the trees, which
																																														    were gently agitated by the wind; the night was nearly dark; and the
																																														    scene would have been solemn and affI swear; and by thee, O Night,
																																														    and by the spirits that preside over thee, I swear to pursue the dæmon,
																																														    who caused this misery, until he or I shall perish in mortal conflict.
																																														    For this purpossessed by phrenzy, and have
																																														    destroyed my miserable existence, but that my vow was heard, and that I
																																														    was reserved for vengeance. The laughter died away: when a well-known
																																														    and abhorred voiceThe blue
																																														    Mediterranean appeared; and, by a strange chance, I saw the fiend enter
																																														    by night, and hide himself in a vessel bound for the Black Sea. I took
																																														    my passage in the same ship; but he eon
																																														    life, to whom care is new, and agony unknown, how can you understand
																																														    what I have felt, and still feel? Cold, want, and fatigue, were the least
																																														    pains which I was destined to endure; I wasded these, as it was here that the population of the
																																														    country chiefly collected. In other places human beings were seldom
																																														    seen; and I generally subsisted on the wild animals that crossed my
																																														     rapture.
																																														     The spirits that guarded me had provided these moments, or rather hours,
																																														     of happiness, that I might retain strength to fulfil my pilgrimage.
																																														     Deprived of this respite, I should have sunk under my hardships. During
																																														     the day I was sustained and iw. Sometimes, indeed,
																																														     he left marks in writing on the barks of the trees, or cut in stone,
																																														     that guided me, and instigated my fury. “My reign is not yet over,”
																																														     (these words were legiseek for prey. The rivers were covered with ice,
																																														     and no fish could be procured; and thus I was cut off from my chief
																																														     article of maintenance.

																																														     The triumph of my enemy increased with the diffistinguished from land by its superior
																																														     wildness and ruggedness. The Greeks wept for joy when they beheld the
																																														     Mediterranean from the hills of Asia, and hailed with rapture the
																																														     boundary of thlet on the seashore. I inquired of the inhabitants concerning the
																																														     fiend, and gained accurate information. A gigantic monster, they said,
																																														     had arrived the night before, armed with a gun and mped me; and I must commence a destructive and almost endless
																																														     journey across the mountainous ices of the ocean,—amidst cold that few
																																														     of the inhabitants could long endure, and which I, the native of a
																																														     genial and sunny climate, could not hope to survit I have endured
																																														     misery, which nothing but the eternal sentiment of a just retribution
																																														     burning within my heart could have enabled me to support. Immense and
																																														     rugged mountains of ice often baith incredible toil gained
																																														     the summit of a sloping ice mountain, and one sinking under his fatigue
																																														     died, I viewed the expanse before me with anguish, when suddenly my eye
																																														     caught a dark specisencumbered the dogs of their
																																														     dead companion, gave them a plentiful portion of food; and, after an
																																														     hour’s rest, which was absolutely necessary, and yet which was bitterly
																																														     irksome to meed on, but in vain. The wind
																																														     arose; the sea roared; and, as with the mighty shock of an earthquake,
																																														     it split, and cracked with a tremendous and overwhelming sound. The work
																																														     was soon finishey these means was enabled, with infinite
																																														     fatigue, to move my ice-raft in the direction of your ship. I had
																																														     determined, if you were going southward, still to trust myself to the
																																														     mercy of theek him,
																																														     and satisfy my vengeance in his death. Yet, do I dare ask you to
																																														     undertake my pilgrimage, to endure the hardships that I have undergone?
																																														     No; I am not so selfish. Yet, when I am dead, if he should appear; if
																																														     the ministers of vengeance should conord into his heart. I will hover near, and direct the steel
																																														     aright.

																																														            *       *       *       *       *

																																															    WALTON, _in continuation_.

																																															    August 26th, 17—.

																																															    You have read this strange  continue his
																																															    tale; at others, his voice broken, yet piercing, uttered with difficulty
																																															    the words so replete with agony. His fine and lovely eyes were now
																																															    lighted up with indignation, now sun to you that the letters of Felix and Safie, which he
																																															    shewed me, and the apparition of the monster, seen from our ship,
																																															    brought to me a greater conviction of the truth of his narrative tha made notes concerning his history: he
																																															    asked to see them, and then himself corrected and augmented them in many
																																															    places; but principally in giving the life and spirit to the
																																															    conversations hend death. Yet
																																															    he enjoys one comfort, the offspring of solitude and delirium: he
																																															    believes, that, when in dreams he holds converse with his friends, and
																																															    derives from that communion consolatioin. He seems to feel
																																															    his own worth, and the greatness of his fall.

																																															    “When younger,” said he, “I felt as if I were destined for some great
																																															    enterprise. My feelings are profound; but I possessed a coolness of
																																															    judgment that fitted me for illustns and hopes are as nothing; and, like the
																																															    archangel who aspired to omnipotence, I am chained in an eternal hell.
																																															    My imagination was vivid, yet my powers of analysis and application were
																																															    inecognize me in this state of degradation.
																																															    Despondency rarely visited my heart; a high destiny seemed to bear me
																																															    on, until I fell, never, never again to rise.”

																																															    Must I then lose this admerior excellence, the
																																															    companions of our childhood always possess a certain power over our
																																															    minds, which hardly any later friend can obtain. They know our infantine
																																															    dispositions, which, howevad; and but one feeling in such a
																																															    solitude can persuade me to preserve my life. If I were engaged in any
																																															    high undertaking or design, fraught with extensive utility to my
																																															    fellow-creatures, tws, whom I have
																																															    persuaded to be my companions, look towards me for aid; but I have none
																																															    to bestow. There is something terribly appalling in our situation, yet
																																															    my courage and hopes do not desert me. We may survive; and if we do not,
																																															    I will repeat the le
																																															    endeavours to fill me with hope; and talks as if life were a possession
																																															    which he valued. He reminds me how often the same accidents have
																																															    happened to other navigators, who have attempted tht, that although it is
																																															    highly probable that these papers may never reach you, yet I cannot
																																															    forbear recording it.

																																															    We are still surrounded by mountains of ice, still in imminent danger of
																																															    be roused by half a
																																															    dozen of the sailors, who desired admission into the cabin. They
																																															    entered; and their leader addressed me. He told me that he and his
																																															    companions had been chosen by the other had I yet conceived
																																															    the idea of returning, if set free. Yet could I, in justice, or even in
																																															    possibility, refuse this demand? I hesitated before I answered; when
																																															    Frankenstein, who had at fiage exhibited; because danger and death
																																															    surrounded, and these dangers you were to brave and overcome. For this
																																															    was it a glorious, for this was it an honourable undertaking. You were
																																															    hereaftes cowards. Oh! be men, or be more than men. Be steady to your
																																															    purposes, and firm as a rock. This ice is not made of such stuff as your
																																															    hearts might be; it is mutable, cannot withstand you, if you say that it
																																															    shall not. Do not return to your families wowards my friend; but he was sunk in
																																															    languor, and almost deprived of life.

																																															    How all this will terminate, I know not; but I had rather die, than
																																															    return shamefully,—my purpose unfulfilledth.

																																															    The die is cast; I have consented to return, if we are not destroyed.
																																															    Thus are my hopes blasted by cowardice and indecision; I come back
																																															    ignorant and disappointed. It requires more phief attention was occupied by my unfortunate guest,
																																															    whose illness increased in such a degree, that he was entirely confined
																																															    to his bed. The ice cracked behind us, and was driven with force t but
																																															    mine is assigned to me by heaven, and I dare not. I am weak; but surely
																																															    the spirits who assist my vengeance will endow me with sufficient
																																															    strength.” Saying this, he endeavoured to and be patient. I
																																															    sat by his bed watching him; his eyes were closed, and I thought he
																																															    slept; but presently he called to me in a feeble voice, and, bidding me
																																															    come near, said—“Alas! iness and well-being. This was my duty; but there
																																															    was another still paramount to that. My duties towards my
																																															    fellow-creatures had greater claims to my attention, because they
																																															    included a greater proportion of happiness or misery. Urged by this
																																															    view, I rether wretched, he ought to die. The task of his destruction
																																															    was mine, but I have failed. When actuated by selfish and vicious
																																															    motives, I asked you to undertake my unfinished work; and I ren. Farewell,
																																															    Walton! Seek happiness in tranquillity, and avoid ambition, even if it
																																															    be only the apparently innocent one of distinguishing yourself in
																																															    science and discoveries. Yet why do I sae you to understand the
																																															    depth of my sorrow? All that I should express would be inadequate and
																																															    feeble. My tears flow; my mind is overshadowed by a cloud of
																																															    disappointment. But I journey towascarcely stir. Again; there
																																															    is a sound as of a human voice, but hoarser; it comes from the cabin
																																															    where the remains of Frankenstein still lie. I must arise, and examine.
																																															    Good night, my sistet one vast hand was extended, in colour and apparent texture
																																															    like that of a mummy. When he heard the sound of my approach, he ceased
																																															    to utter exclamations of grief and horror, and sprung to rage of some
																																															    uncontrollable passion.

																																															    “That is also my victim!” he exclaimed; “in his murder my crimes are
																																															    consummated; the miserable series of my being is wound to its close! Oh,
																																															    Frankenstein! generous and self-devoted being! what does ithis face, there was something so scaring and unearthly in his
																																															    ugliness. I attempted to speak, but the words died away on my lips. The
																																															    monster continued to utter wild and incoherent self-rep, Frankenstein would yet have lived.”

																																															    “And do you dream?” said the dæmon; “do you think that I was then dead
																																															    to agony and remorse?—He,” he continued, pointing to ten imagine.

																																															    “After the murder of Clerval, I returned to Switzerland, heart-broken
																																															    and overcome. I pitied Frankenstein; my pity amounted to horror: I
																																															    abhorred myself. But when I discovedetested, yet could not disobey. Yet when she
																																															    died!—nay, then I was not miserable. I had cast off all feeling,
																																															    subdued all anguish to riot in the excess of my despair. Evil
																																															    thenceforth e made.
																																															    You throw a torch into a pile of buildings, and when they are consumed
																																															    you sit among the ruins, and lament the fall. Hypocritical fiend! if he
																																															    whom you mourn still lived, still would he be the object, again would he
																																															    become the prey of your accube participated. But now, that virtue has
																																															    become to me a shadow, and that happiness and affection are turned into
																																															    bitter and loathing despair, in what should I seek for sympathy? I am
																																															    conteaded me beneath the meanest animal.
																																															    No crime, no mischief, no malignity, no misery, can be found comparable
																																															    to mine. When I call over the frightful catalogue of my deeds, I cannot
																																															    believe tting in impotent passions. For whilst I destroyed his hopes,
																																															    I did not satisfy my own desires. They were for ever ardent and craving;
																																															    still I desired love and fellowship, and I was still spasped to
																																															    death his throat who never injured me or any other living thing. I have
																																															    devoted my creator, the select specimen of all that is worthy of love
																																															    and admiration among men, to misery; Ih must be
																																															    done; but it requires my own. Do not think that I shall be slow to
																																															    perform this sacrifice. I shall quit your vessel on the ice-raft which
																																															    brought me hither, and shall seek the mosed, yet unquenched. He is dead who called me
																																															    into being; and when I shall be no more, the very remembrance of us both
																																															    will speedily vanish. I shall no longer see the sun or stars, or feel
																																															    the winds play on my cheeks. Light, feeling, and sense, will pas these
																																															    eyes will ever behold. Farewell, Frankenstein! If thou wert yet alive,
																																															    and yet cherished a desire of revenge against me, it would be better
																																															    satiated in my life than in my destructionwill be
																																															    extinct. I shall ascend my funeral pile triumphantly, and exult in the
																																															    agony of the torturing flames. The light of that conflagration will fade
																																															    away; my ashes will be swept into theill
																																															    be renamed.

																																															    Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
																																															    law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
																																															    so the Foundation (and you!) canse, including paying royalties for use
																																															    of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
																																															    copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
																																															    easy. You mayLICENSE

																																															    THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

																																															    PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

																																															    To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
																																															    distribution of elect at
																																															    www.gutenberg.org/license.

																																															    Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
																																															    electronic works

																																															    1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
																																															    electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

																																															    1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
																																															    used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
																																															    agrean do with Project
																																															    Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
																																															    agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
																																															    electronic works. See paragraph 1.E bcated in the United States, we do not
																																															    claim a right to prevent eating derivative works based on the work as long as
																																															    all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
																																															    that  whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
																																															    on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
																																															    phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is ahe United States, you will have to check the laws
																																															        of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
																																																  
																																																  1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
																																																  derive the
																																																  copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed any fees or charges. If you are
																																																  redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
																																																  Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
																																																  either witProject Gutenberg™
																																																  trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

																																																  1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
																																																  with the permission of the copyright holderal terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
																																																  will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
																																																  posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
																																																  bociated with Project Gutenberg™.

																																																  1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
																																																  electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
																																																  prominently displayint Gutenberg™ work in a format
																																																  other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
																																																  version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
																																																  (www.gutenberg.org)r access to, viewing, displaying,
																																																  performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
																																																  unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

																																																  1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
																																																  access to or distributing Project G donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
																																																          Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
																																																	          within 60 days following each date on which you prt the address specified in
																																																		          Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
																																																			          Literary Archive Foundation.”
																																																				      
																																																				          • You provide a full refund of full Project Gutenberg™
																																																					          License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
																																																						          copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
																																																							          all use he
																																																								          electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
																																																									          receipt of the work.
																																																										      
																																																										          • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
																																																											         ive Foundation, the manager of
																																																												 the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
																																																												 forth in Section 3 below.

																																																												 1.F.

																																																												 1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend coted by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
																																																												 Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
																																																												 electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
																																																												 contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete,or damaged disk or
																																																												 other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
																																																												 cannot be read by your equipment.

																																																												 1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “R legal
																																																												 fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
																																																												 LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
																																																												 PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNHIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
																																																												 LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
																																																												 INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
																																																												 DAMAGE.

																																																												 1.F.3. LIMITEGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
																																																												 defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
																																																												 receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
																																																												 written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
																																																												 received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
																																																												 with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
																																																												 with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
																																																												 lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
																																																												 or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
																																																												 opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
																																																												 the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
																																																												 without further opportunities to fix the problem.

																																																												 1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
																																																												 in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
																																																												 OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
																																																												 LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

																																																												 1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
																																																												 warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
																																																												 damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
																																																												 violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
																																																												 agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimef this agreement shall not void the
																																																												 remaining provisions.

																																																												 1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
																																																												 trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
																																																												 providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic worksenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
																																																												 additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
																																																												 Defect you cause.

																																																												 Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project nonymous with the free distribution of
																																																												 electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
																																																												 computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
																																																												 exists because of tGutenberg™’s
																																																												 goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
																																																												 remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
																																																												 Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundatiw your efforts and donations can help, see
																																																												 Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

																																																												 Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Fopt status by the Internal
																																																												 Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
																																																												 number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
																																																												 Archive Foundation armail contact links and up
																																																												 to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
																																																												 and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

																																																												 Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
																																																												 Literary Archive Foundation

																																																												 Project Gutearray of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
																																																												 ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
																																																												 status with the IRS.

																																																												 The Foundation is committed tcompliance for any particular state
																																																												 visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

																																																												 While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
																																																												 have not met the solicitation requirements, we knoonations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
																																																												 any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
																																																												 outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

																																																												 PlTo
																																																												 donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

																																																												 Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

																																																												 Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
																																																												 Gnyone. For forty years, he produced and
																																																												 distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
																																																												 volunteer support.

																																																												 Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several pluded. Thus, we do not
																																																												 necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
																																																												 edition.

																																																												 Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
																																																												 facility: www.gutenberg.org.

																																																												 This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
																																																												 io our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
